# 1. Getting going

1 Getting going
To get your computer working you will need a television set
for a screen. Most people at home will use their ordinary colour
or black and white television to show the pictures that the BBC
Microcomputer produces. You will also need a cassette
recorder.
If you have a high quality monitor (for example in a school) then it
can be connected directly to one of the sockets on the back of the
computer. To connect the monitor to the computer you will need a
special monitor lead.
Assuming that you want to use your normal television set,
then you can connect it to the computer using the aerial lead
that is supplied with the computer. One of the plugs on this
lead has a long central prong which fits into the socket on the
back of the computer marked uhf out. The other end of the
lead goes into the back of your television set in place of the
normal aerial lead (figure 1). Don’t worry about the cassette
recorder for the moment.
Next, plug your computer into the mains and switch it on. It
should make a short ‘beep’ and the red light marked caps lock
should come on. The switch on the back of the computer is
marked on/off. Turn the television on too and let it warm up
for a moment.
Probably all you will see on the TV screen at this stage is a
“snow storm”. Sometimes the screen will appear to be just
blank. You will have to “tune” the TV so that it can receive the
transmissions from the BBC Microcomputer. When your
television is tuned correctly words will appear on the screen.
Your television probably has some push-buttons which can be
used to select different channels. Often button number 1 is
tuned to BBC1, button number 2 to BBC2, button number 3 to
ITV and so on. It is best to tune a spare channel for the
computer, for example channel 8. You can then use this for the
computer without interfering with the tuning of the normal
channels.

                                 7
8
    Figure 1
    Connecting the computer to the domestic television and to a cassette
    recorder. The lead shown is for the television connection and is supplied with
    the machine.
Different makes of television set tune channels in different
ways. For some of them, you turn the same knob that you use
to select the channel. For others, there are separate controls. In
either case, you should depress a spare channel button and
then adjust it, or the associated control, until you get a good
picture on the screen. A message similar to
BBC Computer 32K
BASIC
>
should be clear and sharp. Many types of tuning control
indicate, approximately, the channel number that you are
tuning to. The BBC Microcomputer transmits on channel 36. It
will not be too difficult to find the right channel but you will
have to tune the TV carefully to get a really clear picture.
After that, do by all means press every button in sight on the
computer – you can’t do it any harm at all. Usually it just keeps
on saying
Mistake
whenever you press the large key marked RETURN That just
means that the computer does not understand your commands.
Its fault – not yours!
You will see that if you hold any key down for more than a
short time the character on the key appears on the screen, then
there is a short pause, then the character repeats until you take
your finger off again. On the whole, when pressing keys on the
keyboard you should aim to press them briefly – unless you
want this repetition.
Experimenting
Now you are ready to experiment. You might like to try some
of the following to see what the computer can do, but first be
sure to press the key marked BREAK This will clear the screen
and get the computer ready for you.
Type in the following exactly as shown:
MODE 5
and then press the RETURN key. As you will see the command
MODE 5 clears the screen and just leaves the > mark on the
screen, > is known as the “prompt” and it means that the
computer is ready for your next command.

                                 9
Pressing the RETURN key tells the computer that you have
finished the line you are typing and that you want it to obey
your command. Before you press the RETURN key you can
correct errors by pressing the key marked DELETE.
If the computer says Mistake then press the BREAK key and try
again, starting with MODE 5.
Then type in each of the following lines – but don’t forget to
press the RETURN key at the end of every line. Don’t worry if
you make a mistake – it really doesn’t matter!
DRAW 1000,100
DRAW 0,1000
GCOL 0,1
PLOT 85,0,0
If the computer says No such variable then you are
probably pressing the letter O instead of the number 0.
PLOT 86,1000,1000
VDU 19,1,4,0,0,0
VDU 19,3,2,0,0,0
VDU 19,0,1,0,0,0
DRAW 200,0
DRAW 0,200
As you will have gathered the DRAW command is used to
draw lines while PLOT 85 and PLOT 86 are used to plot
and fill in triangles on the screen. When using the graphics the
points on the screen are numbered from 0 to 1279 (left to right)
and from 0 to 1023 (bottom to top). They are rather like
positions on a piece of graph paper.
Words can also be plotted in colours, as you will have seen.
Clear the screen by typing MODE 5 and then type the
following:
COLOUR 1           this is selects a red foreground
COLOUR 2           this selects a yellow foreground
COLOUR 3           this selects a white foreground

                               10
COLOUR 129          this selects a red background
COLOUR 0            this selects a black foreground
COLOUR 130          this selects a yellow background
The computer can create sounds as well. Try typing this in:
SOUND 1,-15,100,200
and then press RETURN
That gives a rather simple, crude sound. It is also possible to
alter the quality of the sound. Try this:
ENVELOPE 2,3,2,-4,4,50,50,50,127,0,0,0,
126,0
(This should be typed in as one line even though it may spill
over to the next line on the screen just as it has on this page.
The computer will treat it as being ‘one line’ when you press
RETURN.) Now carry on with:

SOUND 1,2,1,10
SOUND 2,2,100,1
SOUND 3,2,200,1
You will have to press ESCAPE to stop the effect.

Here’s another one:
ENVELOPE 1,1,-26,-36,-45,255,255,255,
127,0,0,0,126,0
SOUND 1,1,1,1
There is a whole section on sound later on.
Connecting up the cassette recorder
Now get a cassette recorder connected so that you can load the
demonstration programs into the computer from the cassette
tape supplied in the welcome pack. For the moment just follow
the instructions – we can sort out the “whys and wherefores”
later.
You have to do two things before you can load the programs
from the welcome tape: first get the right lead to connect your
cassette recorder to the computer and secondly set the volume
control on the cassette recorder to the correct position.

                                11
Leads
There are a number of different kinds of leads (figure 2). The
connection to the computer is through a 7-pin din connector; a
lead has not been supplied with the machine because there are
so many connections to the many different cassette recorders in
use. In many cases a standard 5-pin din to 5-pin din lead will
be suitable, provided you do not want to use the motor control.
If you want full motor control, take your cassette recorder to
your nearest BBC Microcomputer dealer who will be able to
supply a lead or make one up for you. Alternatively, take your
cassette recorder and this book to a local hi-fi dealer.
Note: Although you may find the ideal cassette lead difficult to
buy locally, many cassette recorders do have a standard 5-pin
din socket and a standard 5-pin din to 5-pin din hi-fi lead will
work with the BBC Microcomputer in many cases.

Volume
Having got the cassette recorder connected to the computer the
only remaining thing to do is to set the playback volume on the
cassette recorder to the correct level.
With the BBC Microcomputer the cassette volume control
setting is not critical. However, a special procedure for setting
the volume control correctly is incorporated into the first
program on the tape.

Running the WELCOME programs
Press the BREAK key and type in the following, exactly as
shown

CHAIN "WELCOME"

and then press the RETURN key. Next insert the welcome
cassette into your recorder. If your cassette recorder has a tone
control then set it to maximum ‘treble’ and leave it there. Now
start the cassette recorder playing by pressing the play button
on the recorder. Then adjust the cassette recorder volume
control slowly, until you get the message:

Your volume control is now properly
set. Please wait while the first
program is loaded

                                12
ANG0
7 pin DIN to 5 pin DIN
and 2.5mm jack

                                                       ANG0
                                                       7 pin DIN to
                                                       7 pin DIN

ANG0
7 pin DIN to two 3.5mm
jacks and one 2.5mm jack

Figure 2 A range of possible cassette leads
You will need to select a lead with a 7-pin din or 5-pin din lead at one end.
This plugs into the computer. The other end of the lead must have suitable
plugs for your particular recorder. Note: a standard 5-pin din lead will work
with many recorders but will not enable you to make use of the computer’s
ability to start and stop the cassette recorder automatically.

                                     13
on the screen. This will give the minimum volume level. You
should then increase the setting a little more. If you need to,
you can rewind the tape at any time. If no message appears
rewind the tape and play it again, increasing the volume
control setting in larger steps, or check the cassette leads are
correctly plugged in.
The system is very reliable, so if you have problems it may be
that your tape recorder is at fault or that you have a fault in the
computer. You are advised to contact your dealer.
Note: Each computer program is recorded on the tape as a kind
of screeching noise. It’s not meant to be listened to, but some
cassette recorders have the annoying habit of playing the tape
through the loudspeaker while the tape is loading into the
computer. Everything depends on what plugs and sockets are
being used. It is possible to stop this on most recorders by
inserting a small (3.5mm) jack plug into the socket on the
recorder marked ear. You could insert the ear-piece supplied
with the recorder if that is more convenient. On other recorders
you may have to insert a din loudspeaker plug, with no wire
connections, into the socket marked ls to turn off the noise.
Don’t try turning the volume control down because then the
computer will not be able to “hear” the tape either. The
important thing to do is to try to disable the internal
loudspeaker as described above.
Make a note of the volume setting on your cassette recorder
and always use that setting when playing back the welcome
cassette. You may need to use a different setting with other
tapes that you have purchased or recorded yourself.
On the welcome cassette the volume control setting program is
repeated many times at the beginning of the tape. With practice
it is possible to save time by running the tape forward by about
2 minutes (once the volume control is set) and then begin
playing the tape from this point, having first entered the
command CHAIN"WELCOME".
When the first welcome program has loaded into the computer
it will clear the screen and give you instructions.
The welcome pack includes a booklet which describes not only
how to get the programs running but also what each of the
sixteen programs does.

                                14
As time goes by, a whole range of ‘application programs’ will
be available on cassette and it will be possible to run these in
exactly the same way as the welcome package.

The keyboard
Anyone who has used a standard typewriter will be reasonably
familiar with the positions of most of the symbols on the
keyboard of the BBC Microcomputer. However, there are a
number of special keys which need to be mastered (see figure 3)
and these are described below.
If you are a keyboard ‘novice’ you may find the layout
daunting. Don’t worry – first of all it is not necessary to be a
touch typist to work the computer; secondly, there is a
program on the welcome cassette which will help you to
practice finding the various keys, and most people find that
with a little practice they become familiar with them fairly
quickly.
Some keys have two symbols engraved on them – we’ll call
those on the top ‘upper case’ and those below ‘lower case’
symbols.

CAPS LOCK
When the machine is switched on, the middle light should be
on, telling you that the CAPS LOCK key is on. This gives capital
letters and lower case symbols and is the most useful state for
programming because the computer only recognises
commands typed in using capital letters. By pressing the
CAPS LOCK key once you can switch the light off. Now you get
lower case letters and lower case symbols. Press it again and it
will be on again.

SHIFT
Whether CAPS LOCK is on or off, if you press either of the
SHIFT keys and hold it down while typing in a character you
will get a capital letter or upper case symbol.
Holding down CTRL and SHIFT together stops the computer
‘writing’ to the screen. This can be useful if it is ‘writing’ faster
than you can read.

                                 15
                                                       10 User defined
                                                       function keys                                                                   Editing keys

                                              fØ f1 f2 f3 f4 f5 f6 f7 f8 f9                                      BREAK

                                       !               #    $    %       &           (       )               =       ~            ¦
                             ESCAPE            "                               ´                     Ø                                   ‘ ’
                                       1       2       3    4    5       6     7     8       9               –       ^           \
                                                                                                                         {           £
                                TAB     Q W E R                    T     Y U             I       O P @                                     “        ”
                                                                                                                         [           —
                              CAPS                                                                           +       Ü           }
                                      CTRL                                                                                               RETURN

        ‘ROM’ cartridges
                              LOCK

        Socket for plug-in
                                               A       S D       F G H               J       K       L                           ]

16
                                                                                                             ;       :
                              SHIFT                                                              <       >       ?
                                      SHIFT                                                                              SHIFT        DELETE COPY
                              LOCK                 Z    X C V            B N M                   ,       .       /
                                                                             SPACE
                             cassette caps     shift
                              motor lock       lock
                              light   light    light

     Figure 3
     The keyboard of the BBC Microcomputer.
     For details, see text
SHIFT LOCK
Pressing this key once gives capital letters and upper case
symbols until it is pressed again. It has its own on/off light.
Practice in the use of these keys is given in one of the first
programs in the welcome pack – the one called KEYBOARD.

RETURN
This key is the most commonly used key on the keyboard.
When a command or anything else is typed in, it is not usually
acted upon until the RETURN key is pressed. In other words,
this key informs the computer that you have finished entering
a line or a reply. Until you press RETURN , you can add to or
delete what you have typed in.

Cursor control keys

These enable you to move the flashing cursor around the
screen when editing a program. Pressing any of them makes
the computer automatically enter the “editing mode” during
which two ‘cursors’ are shown on the screen (see page 29).

DELETE
Pressing this key will cause the last character typed in to be
erased from the screen. If held down, it will then erase further
characters until released.

COPY
This key, used in conjunction with the cursor control keys,
enables anything on the screen to be copied – a useful feature
when editing a line in program.

ESCAPE
This key is usually used to stop a program which is running,
however, it can be programmed to do other things when
pressed – such as to move you from one part of a program to
another.

BREAK
This key stops the computer no matter what it is doing. The
computer forgets almost everything that it has been set to do.

                                17
Do not get into the habit of using BREAK. The ESCAPE key
provides a much less violent way of escaping, from a program!
(See page 142 for more details on BREAK).

CTRL
This key behaves similarly to the SHIFT key in that it can be
used to change the character generated by other keys. For
example, pressing CTRL and G (called Control G) makes the
internal speaker make a short noise. CTRL B is used to turn a
printer on and CTRL C turns it off. CTRL N makes the
computer stop at the bottom of each page, etc., etc. More
information on control codes is given on page 378.

TAB
Another key useful in special circumstances – like word
processing.
  ~ ¦ { } £
  ^ \ [ ] _
These keys can be somewhat confusing because they seem to
generate the wrong characters sometimes. The problem is that
there are two international standards for displayed characters
(Teletext and ascii) and the BBC Computer can display both.
mode 7 generates the Teletext display characters and
modes 0 to 6 show the ascii characters. But don’t worry, the
computer recognises the key correctly regardless of what it has
to display on the screen. For completeness, here is a table
showing all these characters:

  On the key        Displayed on the screen        in modes
                          in mode 7                  0 to 6

       ~                       ÷                       ~
       ^                       h                       ^
       ¦                       ||                      ¦
       \                       12                      \
       {                       14                      {
       [                       f                       [
       }                       34                      }
       ]                       g                       ]

Note that in mode 7 a zero is shown as a rather pointed 0
whereas in all other modes, zeros have a slash thus –  – to help

                               18
to differentiate them from the letter O. The keyboard is also
marked in this way.

Plug in cartridge socket
There may be a slot to the left of the main keyboard where it
will be possible to insert cartridge packs containing games and
other programs. This inexpensive option will enable users to
play games and use other programs with the minimum of
effort.

                               19
Giving the
computer
instructions – Part I

           20
