# 2. Commands

2 Commands
There are two ways of getting the computer to do something:
1 Give it commands which it can act on straight away. This is
what happened when you typed in the lines in section 1.
2 Give it a series of numbered instructions, often called
statements, which it can store in its memory and carry out in
sequence when told to do so. A stored series of instructions is
called a program.
Many of the keywords in basic can be used both as commands
and as statements in a program.
The rest of this section is concerned with ‘command mode’.

PRINT is used to make the computer print something on the
screen. Try these two examples:
PRINT "HELLO"
don’t forget to press RETURN at the end of each line.
PRINT 3+4
In the second example you have given the computer a
command to print the sum of 3 and 4. The computer can very
easily do addition, subtraction, multiplication and division.
The addition, subtraction, multiplication and division signs are
all on the right side of the keyboard. If you are interested in
doing mathematical or financial work then you will need to
know the symbols that the computer uses for various
mathematical things. They are:

+   addition
-   subtraction
*   multiplication
/   division
^   raise to the power
.   decimal point

                               21
If you want to get the + or * then you will have to press the
SHIFT key as well as the key you want. It’s rather like a type-
writer: while holding the SHIFT key down, press the + sign
quickly once.
Try typing in the following and check that they work, in other
words see that they produce the expected answers.
PRINT 4+8
PRINT 18 - 2 * 4
PRINT 131/4
PRINT SQR(2)
The last one will print the square root of 2 which is 1.41421356.
Then try
MODE 5
which will make the computer clear the screen and get it ready
to draw lines as well as text. In this mode
COLOUR 129
will select a red background, and
CLS
will clear the screen to the background colour. In each case you
have given the computer a command and it has obeyed it
immediately. Working like this is called “working in command
mode”.
While in this mode you might like to learn how to use the
bright red User Defined Function Keys. Each of these keys can be
used to store a word or several words. For example they could
be programmed so that each one selects a different colour. Try
this
*KEY 2 COLOUR 2 ¦M
The ¦ shown above is produced by a special key. On the
keyboard this key is the third key from the right on the row
below the red keys. In Mode 7 this key produces || on the
screen.
Once you have typed that in then every time you press the key
marked f2, the computer will change to colour 2 which gives

                               22
yellow lettering. In a similar way you could program some of
the other keys like this:
*KEY 0 COLOUR 0 ¦M
*KEY 1 COLOUR 1 ¦M
*KEY 3 COLOUR 3 ¦M
Note the exact position of spaces in what you type in.
Of course red letters don’t show up very well on a red
background! You will have noticed the ¦M at the end of each
line above. That is the code used to get a RETURN into the User
Defined Function Keys.
If the picture on your television screen is either too far up or
too far down the screen, you can move the whole display with
the command *TV.
*TV 255 will move down one line
*TV 254 will move down two lines
*TV 1 will move up one line
*TV 2 will move up two lines
The movements come into affect next time you press BREAK or
change mode.

                               23
