# 3. An introduction to variables

3 An introduction
  to variables
In the last section we made the computer do a number of
calculations but it was never expected to remember any of the
results after it had printed them out. Suppose that you have to
calculate the wages for everyone in a company. After you have
worked out each person’s wage, it would he useful to be able
to add it to all the other wages that you had worked out so far,
so that in the end you would know the total wage bill. Keeping
track of things that vary during a long calculation is done by
using “variables”.
Try typing this line into the computer
LET Z=5
And now try typing in each of the following lines
PRINT Z+6
PRINT Z * 12
As you will have seen, once we have told the computer that “Z
is 5” it understands that every time we use the letter Z in a sum
it has to go and have a look to find out what the value of Z is (5
in this case) and use that number in the arithmetic that we set it
to do. Now type in
LET Z=7
And then try these two lines
PRINT Z+12
PRINT Z/3
As you will gather the value of Z has changed from 5 to 7. In
computer jargon “Z” is called a “numeric variable”. That
means that Z can be used to store any number, and you can
change the value of Z any time you want to.

                               24
The computer is able to store hundreds of different variables
and the variables don’t just have to be called something as
simple as Z, you can call a variable by as long a name as you
want. For example you could write
MYAGE=30
Notice that MYAGE was written without any spaces between
the word MY and AGE. There are only four restrictions about
the names that we give to variables.
1 There must be no spaces in the middle of a variable name.
2 All variable names must start with a letter, though you can
stick as many numbers in as you want to later on.
3 You must not use punctuation marks (like exclamation
marks and question marks) in the variable name but you can
use an underline character.
4 Variable names should not begin with basic “keywords” like
PRINT and LET. One that is particularly easy to use by
mistake is the keyword TO. However it is quite permissible to
start a variable name with a lower case “to” because upper and
lower case names are quite different. There is a full list of
keywords starting on page 483.
To get lower case characters on the screen, make sure that the
CAPS LOCK is off by depressing it so that its light goes out. In
this condition you will get small letters and numbers. Hold the
SHIFT key down if you want to get just a few capital letters.
Any of the following variable names would be acceptable to
the computer
LET   AGE=38
LET   this_year=1982
LET   lengthOFrod=18
LET   CAR_mileage=13280
LET   value5=16.1
LET   weight4=0.00135
LET   chicken2egg3=51.6
However the following variable names are illegal.
LET Football Result=3 [there’s a space]
LET Who?=6            [there’s a question mark]
LET 4thvalue=16.3     [starts with a number]

                               25
LET TODAY=23                       [starts with TO]
LET PRINT=1234.56                  [PRINT is a reserved
                                   word]
You will notice that in all the examples above we have put the
word LET before the variable name. That gives a clear
indication of what is actually happening inside the computer,
namely that the numeric: variable “this_year”, in one of the
examples, is being given a new value “1982”. The word LET is
optional and the computer will understand perfectly well if we
say
this_year=1982
This shortened version is much more common.

                              26
