# 4. A simple program

4 A simple program

In the previous sections we have been giving the computer
commands which it obeys immediately. The problem with this
technique is that you have to wait until the computer has
completed one command before you can give it the next one. If
the computer takes a long time to work out one of the problems
you have set it, then you may have to waste an awful lot of time
just sitting there waiting for it. For example if you want your
computer to work out the number of 5p, 10p and 50p coins that
you will need to pay the wages at the end of the week the
computer will take a fair time to calculate all the wages before it
can sort out the coins required.
The same problem arises when you take a car into a garage to
be serviced. You could for example stand by the mechanic and
say “Right, first of all I want the oil changed” and then you
could wait for him to change the oil. When he had completed
that you could then say “Right, now I want you to replace the
bulb that has blown in one of the front headlights” and then
you could wait for him to do that job. And thirdly you might
say “The exhaust is making a bit of noise, so I want you to put
the car up on the ramp and check the exhaust”.
Inevitably you would spend a great deal of time waiting for the
mechanic to complete the job that you had set him before you
could give him the next job. There is a far more efficient way of
doing things; when you go into the garage you give the
mechanic a whole set of instructions, for example
first of all change the oil,
secondly replace the headlamp bulb,
thirdly stop the exhaust rattling.
Once you have given your set of instructions and checked that
the garage understands what they have to do, you can then
walk off and have a cup of coffee and then go back expecting
the job to be done. Now the same thing applies with a
computer. It is far better to give it a whole set of instructions
                                27
and set it going on something while you wander off and have a
cup of coffee. “Writing a computer program” is nothing more
than giving a set of instructions.
If you give the computer a command like
PRINT "HOW ARE YOU"
then the computer will do that immediately. On the other
hand, if you give the computer a statement
     10 PRINT "HOW ARE YOU"
then the computer will regard that as instruction number 10
and it will not do it straight away, but expect other instructions
to follow. Instruction number 10 is usually referred to as Line
10 etc. Again: if there is a line number then the statement is
part of a program; if there is no line number then it is a
command which the computer must obey immediately.
When you have given the computer a set of instructions and
you then want it to carry them out, you type the word RUN on
the keyboard. The computer will then carry out the instructions
that you asked it to do one at a time and in line-number order.
In other words, it will “execute the program” that you have
typed in. Just to check that you have got the idea of what is
going on, here is a small program that you can type in.
     10   REPEAT
     20   PRINT "GIVE ME A NUMBER";
     30   INPUT B
     40   PRINT "12 TIMES ";B;" IS ";12*B
     50   UNTIL B=0

When you RUN the program line 20 will print the message
GIVE ME A NUMBER
on the screen.
Line 30 will print a question mark on the screen and wait for
you to type in a number (followed by RETURN – as usual). The
number you type in will become the value of the variable “B”.
Line 40 will first print the words 12 TIMES followed on the
same line by the number you typed in, followed on the same
line by the word IS followed by the result of the calculation.

                                28
The semi-colons tell the computer to print the next item on the
same line as the previous one and right up against it.
Line 50 sends the computer back to line 10 unless B=0, when
the program will stop.
Another way of stopping the program is to press the “panic
button” which is marked ESCAPE on the keyboard. It is at the
top left of the keyboard. If the computer seems to be ignoring
you because it’s too busy running a program you can nearly
always get its attention by pressing the ESCAPE button.
When you do that it will stop running your program and print
a > prompt to show that it has stopped the program and that
you have command again.
When the computer shows a > it is in Command Mode. You can
change your program, give it commands for immediate
execution, or tell it to RUN the program (in its memory) again.
It doesn’t forget a program when you press ESCAPE.
If the computer is in command mode (in other words the last
thing on the screen is >) then you can command it to print the
program in its memory by typing
LIST
and pressing RETURN .
The computer will then give a list of the program on the screen
for you to check. If you discover that you have made an error,
for example that you have got something wrong in line 20, then
it is easy to correct the error. There are two ways of correcting
major errors:

1 Retype the whole line
2 Use the screen editor

Using the screen editor
There is a group of six keys on the right hand side of the
keyboard which can be used to edit, or alter, program lines that
are displayed on the screen. Four of the keys have arrows on
them and are coloured a lighter brown than most of the other
keys. These keys enable you to move a flashing cursor around
the screen to a line that you wish to edit. As soon as you press
one of these keys the computer enters a special “editing mode”
where it displays two cursors. The large white block is called

                               29
the write cursor and it shows you where anything that you
enter will appear. The other small, flashing cursor – the read
cursor – is the one that can be moved around by the arrow
keys.

Try moving the read cursor, by using the arrow keys, until it is
under a letter at the start of a word and then press the COPY
key several times. As you will see the COPY key copies
everything that the read cursor passes under into the new
input line. Half way through copying a line you can always use

to move the read cursor to some new place on the screen before
using COPY again to copy some other text to your new input
line. The DELETE key can always been used to delete
characters from the input line.
You can also type new characters in at any time instead of
using the COPY key. When your new input line is complete
just press RETURN in the usual way.
Try the following: clear the screen with the command CLS and
then LIST the program. It should include the line
     20 PRINT "GIVE ME A NUMBER";
If not, then type that line in so that you can edit it. Suppose
that you wanted to insert the word BIG so that line 20 reads
     20 PRINT "GIVE ME A BIG NUMBER";
then all you have to do is to press the up-arrow cursor key until
the small flashing line is positioned under the 2 of 20. Then
press the COPY key to copy the first part of line 20 to a fresh
line at the bottom. When the cursor reaches the space after the
A where you want to insert the word BIG, just type it in with a
space in front – it will appear on the bottom line. Then COPY
the rest of the line 20, the space after the A becoming the space
after BIG. At the end press RETURN.
Now try changing the program already in the computer once
again by doing the following things:
a List the program by using the LIST command.

                               30
b Practice using the cursor control and COPY keys to alter
line 20 so that it reads:
     20 PRINT "NOW GIVE ME A BIG NUMBER";
c Now add these new lines. Don’t forget to press RETURN
after each one.
       5 CLS
      25 REPEAT
      35 IF B<1000 THEN PRINT "I SAID A
BIG NUMBER"
      37 UNTIL B>1000
Note: it doesn’t matter in what order you type in new lines.
The computer will automatically put them into numerical
order. You will see that this is true by typing
LIST RETURN
These extra lines tell the computer to reject any number smaller
than 1000 and to go on going back to line 30 to ask for a new
number until that number is greater than 1000. The symbol <
means ‘is smaller than’, and > means ‘is greater than’. IF and
THEN are self explanatory.
d Now RUN the program.
>RUN
NOW GIVE ME A BIG NUMBER? 16
I SAID A BIG NUMBER
?20
I SAID A BIG NUMBER
?2000
12 TIMES 2000 IS 24000
NOW GIVE ME A BIG NUMBER?
This program will go on running until you press ESCAPE. If
you look you will see that if you give the value 0 for the
number, the program never reaches line 50, so it can never end
unless you press the panic button!
Removing part of a program
Quite often you will want to delete a whole line or group of
lines in your program. This is easy to do but don’t forget that if
you type in a new line 20 (for example), it will automatically
remove the old line 20 and replace it with your new one. If you
just want to delete a line completely then type in just the line
number and press RETURN thus:
      20 RETURN

                               31
To delete a whole set of line numbers, for example, lines 50 to
70 inclusive, you can type
DELETE 50, 70
You cannot get these lines back once they are deleted – unless
you can copy them off the screen, so use this with care.
After you have deleted several lines – or if you have typed in
lots of new lines – you often find that you have a very odd set
of line numbers. The command
RENUMBER
will make the computer go through your whole program
renumbering all the lines so that they are given line numbers in
a tidy sequence. Here is an awful example of programming
style – but it will illustrate the renumber command. Don’t
bother to type it in – just look at it.
>LIST
     1 REM ** GOTO GOTO GOTO
     2 REM WITH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS TO
     3 REM "COMPUTERS IN SCHOOLS"
     4 REM THE JOURNAL OF MUSE
    15 GOTO 100
    16 GOTO 95
    40 N=N+1
    44 END
    57 IF N=18 THEN PRINT "GOTO OR NOT
TO GOTO"
    60 IF N>35 THEN GOTO 110
    78 GOTO 40
    95 PRINT "**THE GOTO SHOW**": GOTO
40
   100 N=0: GOTO 16
   105 PRINT "GOT TO GOTO GOTO NOW"
   110 GOTO 44
   115 PRINT "GOTO OR NOT TO GOTO";:GOTO
60

>RENUMBER
>LIST
   10 REM ** GOTO GOTO GOTO
   20 REM WITH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS TO

                               32
    30 REM "COMPUTERS IN SCHOOLS"
    40 REM THE JOURNAL OF MUSE
    50 GOTO 130
    60 GOTO 120
    70 N=N+1
    80 END
    90 IF N=18 THEN PRINT "GOTO OR NOT
TO GOTO"
   100 IF N>35 THEN GOTO 150
   110 GOTO 70
   120 PRINT "**THE GOTO SHOW**": GOTO
70
   130 N=0: GOTO 60
   140 PRINT "GOT TO GOTO GOTO NOW"
   150 GOTO 80
   160 PRINT "GOTO OR NOT TO GOTO";:GOTO
100

>RUN
**THE GOTO SHOW**
As you will see, the RENUMBER command has not only
renumbered all the line numbers but it has accurately
renumbered the references to line numbers which occur within
the program itself – namely after the statements containing the
keyword GOTO. (This gives the computer the instruction to go
to a particular line number and carry out the instruction it finds
there.)

Removing a program
If you want to write a new program you will want to remove
the old program from the computer’s memory. This can be
done by using the command NEW, or by pressing the BREAK
key. In either case, if you regret having lost your program, type
OLD and press RETURN and, providing you haven’t begun to
type in a new program, the old one should reappear.
You can always check what’s in the memory by typing LIST.
Try experimenting with these various commands on the
program you have typed in.

                               33
