# 5. Recording programs on cassette

5 Recording
  programs on
  cassette

The welcome cassette supplied with your BBC Microcomputer
has a number of programs stored on it. You can store a copy of
any program on cassette and then load it back into the machine
at some time in the future. It really is just like recording music
onto a cassette – you can then play the cassette back a few days
later and the music will still be there.
If you decide that you don’t want to keep the computer
program that you have saved on cassette then you can just
record a new program over the old one in the same way that
you can re-use a cassette when recording music. And in the
same way that it is very easy to forget where a particular piece
of music is recorded on a cassette, so it’s very easy to forget
where on the cassette you have stored a particular program. It
is very strongly suggested that you use the tape counter to
keep an index of where programs are on the cassette. Also you
must leave gaps between programs. It is very easy to let one
program run over the start of the next one if they are all
squashed close together. If programs do overlap then you will
definitely lose one of them. Be warned!
Most short programs will only move the cassette tape counter
on 30 or 40 positions but play safe and spread the programs out
over the length of the cassette. If you record the first program
at 0000, the second at 0100, the next at 0200 and so on then they
will be easy to find and they are unlikely to run over each
other.
Note: don’t make the mistake of trying to record on the clear
plastic tape ‘leader’ – wind the tape on by hand until the brown
tape itself is exposed.
                                34
Saving a program on cassette
If you have typed a program into your microcomputer then all
you have to do to save it is to
1 Insert the cassette into the recorder.
2 Set the tape counter to 0000 when the tape is fully re-wound.
3 Type
SAVE "MYPROG"
on the computer and then press the RETURN key.
4 The message RECORD then RETURN will appear.
5 Fast forward the cassette to the place where you want to
record the program – this will be 100 or 200 or 300 etc. on the
tape counter.
6 Press the record button on the cassette and then press the
RETURN key.
If you want to give up at any time then press the ESCAPE key.
Notice that MYPROG is the name that we happened to give to the
program. You can call your program by any name you like so long as
it has no more than 10 characters. For example you could have typed
SAVE "FRED" or
SAVE "GAME3" or
SAVE "picture"
While the program is being saved on the cassette the name of
the program and some numbers will appear to tell you that
things are happening. When the computer has finished, the >
prompt will re-appear and the tape will stop automatically. If
you don’t have cassette motor control then you will have to
stop the recorder manually after the > prompt re-appears.
That’s it.
Checking a recording
If you want to check that you have successfully recorded your
program on the tape then you can use the *CAT command
(see page 36). If your recording failed for any reason you can
always re-record it. See page 390 if you have problems.
Loading a program from cassette
Loading a program back into the computer is just like playing a

                                35
particular piece of music which has been recorded on the
cassette.
1 Type
LOAD "MYPROG"
and then press the RETURN key. The message Searching
will appear. Of course if your program is called something else
then use the right name, for example
LOAD "GAME3"
2 Rewind the cassette to just before the start of your program
(which will be at 100 or 200 etc.)
3 Check that the volume and tone control settings are correct –
see page 12 if you are not sure how to find the correct settings.
4 Start playing the cassette by pressing the play button on the
recorder.
When the computer finds any program on the cassette it will
show the name of the program on the screen. When it finds the
program it is looking for it will print “Loading” to let you
know that it is now loading the right program.
When the computer has finished loading the program it will
print the > prompt. It will also automatically stop the tape if
you have automatic motor control, if not then you will have to
stop the tape manually.
The program is now in the computer. You can type RUN to
make it work, as usual.
There is one more useful feature to do with loading and saving
programs. Instead of typing LOAD "MYPROG" you can type
CHAIN "MYPROG". This not only loads in the program
MYPROG but also starts it working as soon as it has loaded.
It saves you having to type RUN after the program has loaded.
It is normally more convenient to use CHAIN than LOAD.
Cataloguing a tape
If you forget what programs you have on the tape then you can
get a catalogue by typing
*CAT
and then playing the tape. But you’ll have to wait until the tape
has run through the programs.

                                36
What the numbers mean
A typical catalogue looks like this
WELCOME          00   0084
INTRO            08   088E
INDEX            0A   0ABA
KEYBOARD         25   2545
The file-name is followed by two ‘hexadecimal’ numbers which
give the “block number”. Each program is recorded as a series
of “blocks”. See page 71 for an explanation of hexadecimal
numbers.
The last number on the line gives the ‘length’ of the file.
The action of cataloguing a tape also lets the computer verify
the information recorded. If there are errors in any of the data
on the tape it will print a message and continue.
The ESCAPE key allows you to leave cassette operations
whenever you like. If you leave from the middle of a LOAD
operation you will probably get a Bad Program error. Type
NEW to remove this.
More information about cassette formats, loading errors and
files is given on page 390.

                                37
