# 7. AUTO, DELETE, REM, RENUMBER

7 AUTO, DELETE,
  REM, RENUMBER
basic provides a number of facilities to help the user to enter
programs into the computer and to modify programs already
there. As you will know by now, it is usual to use line numbers
10, 20, 30, 40 etc., for programs. This leaves gaps where the user
can insert extra lines later on – for example, he or she might
insert lines 11, 12, 13 and 14. When typing in a line of program
the user types in the “line number” first and then the rest of the
line. For example,
     10 PRINT "THIS IS A PROGRAM"
The command AUTO instructs the computer to “offer” the line
numbers automatically to the user. As an option you can tell
the computer to start offering lines from any number. Thus
AUTO 300 would make the computer produce line number
300, then 310, then 320, etc. There are other options, too, which
are explained on page 211.
The command DELETE allows the user to delete a group of
lines from his or her program. When you are writing a long
program you quite often need to be able to delete a large chunk
of it. The keyword DELETE is followed by two numbers
which give the first and last lines that you wish to remove.
Thus
DELETE 150,330
would delete all the lines with numbers between 150 and 330.
Single lines can be removed by typing in the line number and
pressing RETURN.
REM is a very useful statement. It enables you to put remarks
in your program to remind you (not the computer) what is
going on. If you are developing a big program – or loading a
simple program that you have not used for some time – it is

                               53
very easy to forget how it works or what it does. Normally
people place several REMs at the start of a program to give
general information and then put a REM at major points
further down the program. See pages 232 or 264 for examples.
Once you have entered a program you will very often find that
the line numbers are no longer in a neat sequence. As we have
seen the command RENUMBER makes the computer go
through the whole program changing all the line numbers so
that they start at line 10 and increase by 10 for each successive
line. Certainly, when you have finished a program it is a good
idea to RENUMBER it so that it looks tidy. If you have a
program in the computer try
RENUMBER
and then LIST the program to see the effect. After that try
RENUMBER 900,100
and you will see, when you list the program, that the computer
has renumbered the whole program but the new version has
line numbers starting at 900 and this time increasing by steps of
100.

It is possible to put more than one statement on a line. For
example, the two statements
CLS (clear the screen)
PRINT "HELLO"
can be put on one line, so long as the individual statements are
separated by colons, thus:
CLS : PRINT "HELLO"
You can put as many statements on a line as you like so long as
the line has less than about 230 characters. The argument for
using “multiple statement lines” is that it saves some memory
space and may make the program work a little faster. But
against that you will notice that it becomes much more difficult
to follow the program when you list it (see page 98).

                               54
