# 8. Introducing graphics

8 Introducing
  graphics

Modes, Colours, Graphics and Windows
The Model A BBC computer can display text and graphics in
four different modes; the Model B can show eight different
modes. Only one mode can be used at a time. The Teletext
Mode (mode 7) differs from all the other modes in many ways
and a whole chapter has been devoted to that mode (see page
150). In particular it is not easy to draw lines or triangles in
mode 7 and the colour of the text is changed in a special way.
Finally some characters are displayed on the screen differently
in this mode – for example the character [ is displayed as f.
On the Model A there are two modes in which graphics can be
used (mode 4 and mode 5). With a Model B five graphics
modes are available. The description which follows will assume
that you are in mode 5. To reach it, simply type MODE 5 and
press RETURN. Note that pressing BREAK will return you to
mode 7 so avoid using BREAK – the “panic button” is
marked ESCAPE. If you press this the computer will stop
what it is doing and return control to you. mode 5 is a four
colour mode which means that up to four different colours can
be shown on the screen at any time. When you enter mode 5
two “colours” are displayed – white letters on a black
background. As you will be aware from earlier chapters the
colour of the text can be changed with the COLOUR statement,
and since this is a four colour mode you can select from
COLOUR     0 black
COLOUR     1 red
COLOUR     2 yellow
COLOUR     3 white
The same four colours (black, red, yellow and white) may be
selected for the background with the commands

                               55
COLOUR             128 (128+0)                  black
COLOUR             129 (128+1)                  red
COLOUR             130 (128+2)                  yellow
COLOUR             131 (128+3)                  white
The COLOUR statement can be used to change the colour of
the text foreground and background – but not the colour of any
graphics: for that you need to use another basic keyword –
GCOL, which stands for Graphics COLour.

Graphics
For the graphics: when drawing lines and triangles,
positions on the screen are given with two numbers (the x and
y co-ordinates).

      1023

                               800                   C

                  100
     Y              B
co-ordinate
                                                     800
                   500

                         600          A
              0                 X co-ordinate              1279

The point A has co-ordinates 600 across, 0 up
The point B is at position 100,500 and C is at 800,800
The statement
DRAW 800,800
will draw a line from the last point ‘visited’ to 800,800. If no
point has been visited, the computer will assume that it starts
from the point 0,0.
To move without drawing a line use the command MOVE. So
to draw a line from 1000,0 to 1000,1000 type
MOVE 1000,0
DRAW 1000,1000
DRAW 100,500 will draw another line, and so on. As well as
MOVE and DRAW there are PLOT commands for other effects.

                                                56
These are described in a later chapter. The statement GCOL is
used to change the graphics colour used by the DRAW state-
ment. GCOL is followed by two numbers, the first is normally
zero and the second determines the graphics colours e.g.
GCOL         0,0 black lines
GCOL         0,1 red lines
GCOL         0,2 yellow lines
GCOL         0,3 white lines
We’ll consider what happens when the first number is not zero
later on (page 167).
As with the text colours, one can change both foreground and
background colours. However, before that can be illustrated it
will be easier to set up two ‘windows’ on the screen – one for
text and one for graphics so that you can be quite clear which is
which. We will then return to the GCOL statement.
Windows
At the moment the whole screen can be used for text and the
whole screen can be used for graphics. In some modes (eg
mode 5) we can restrict each to a specific “window” – or section
of the screen. In modes without graphics (modes 3, 6 and 7)
only text windows can be used. Imagine we want to create two
windows as shown below – on the left a graphics window; on
the right a text window. Suppose that the text window
stretches from the top of the screen right to the bottom but the
graphics window stops short of the bottom:

          graphics          text
          window           window

100
  0
      0              300
a Making a graphics window
Imagine a graphics window which has its edges a, b, c and d
‘graphics units’ away from the bottom left hand corner of the
screen (which is always the starting point for graphics).

                                    57
1023

                    d

                 graphics
                 window
             c
       a
                            b

   0                                              1279

The statement VDU 24 is used (with some numbers after it) to
set up a graphics window (VDU stands for Visual Display
Unit). For the window shown above the full statement is
VDU 24, a; b; c; d;
Note: the comma after 24 and the semi colon after all the other
values. The reason for this punctuation is given on page 386. So
for our actual graphics window we would put
VDU 24, 0;100;300;1000;
In all screen modes which can support easily defined graphics
the range of values for a, b, c and d is always the same: 0-1023
vertically, 0-1279 horizontally.

b Making a text window
Unlike graphics, text ‘starts’ at the top left hand corner of the
screen, so text windows are defined using that point as zero.
Imagine the text window has edges a, b, c and d ‘text units’
away from the top left of the screen, as shown:
   0                                               19
                                         d

                                 text
                                window

                        c
                                  b
             a

  31

                                             58
The statement VDU 28 is used to setup the window as
follows
VDU 28,a,b,c,d
Note: the comma after the 28 and between the other values.
There is no comma at the end.

For the text window we wanted to set up, the statement would
be
VDU 28,5,31,19,0
To prove that we now have two separate windows try
COLOUR 129
CLS
to fill the text window with red and
GCOL 0,130
CLG
to fill the graphics window with yellow.

Note: In the various different screen modes the number of text
characters which can be accommodated along the screen and
down the screen is also different. This affects the range of
values for the horizontal distances a and c as follows:
modes 0 and 3 (which support 80 characters to the line) 0 to 79
modes 1, 4, 6 and 7 (which support 40 characters to the line)
                                                          0 to 39
modes 2 and 5 (which support 20 characters to the line) 0 to 19

Similarly the values of b and d depend on the mode.
modes 0,1,2,4 and 5 have 32 lines (0 to 31)
modes 3,6 and 7 have 25 lines (0 to 24)

To recap, to set up the windows press BREAK then type the
following – with RETURN at the end of each line. You are
working in command mode rather than writing a program, so
the computer acts on each instruction as you press RETURN. It
also means that pressing BREAK in the middle of what follows
would destroy the text and graphics windows and send the
computer back to mode 7.

                               59
MODE 5
VDU 24,0;100;300;1000;
VDU 28,5,31,19,0
CLS
The command CLS clears the text from the screen.
Now try typing the following lines
DRAW    0,1000
DRAW    100,1000
DRAW    0,0
DRAW    1000,1000
You will find that text is now only appearing in the text
window and that graphics are only appearing in the graphics
window. If you want to clear the text only, type CLS. If you
want to clear the graphics only, type CLG. (Normally CLS
clears the whole screen, but where independent text and
graphics areas are defined, CLS only clears the text.) You will
also notice that although some of the commands have told the
computer to draw in areas of the screen outside the graphics
window it has not done so visibly.
Windows may overlap – in fact when you change mode both
the text and graphic windows fill the whole screen, and you
can move windows without destroying what is on the screen,
although changing mode does clear the screen. To reset both
text and graphics windows to the whole screen, e.g, in the
middle of a program, use VDU 26.
VDU 5 enables text to be drawn at any position inside a
graphics window – see pages 49, 74 and 379.

Changing the colours of text and graphics
Now back to text and graphic colours. Let us define the text
background to be red and the graphics background to be
yellow.
COLOUR 129 red text background
GCOL 0,130 yellow graphics background,
and then clear the text and graphics areas to their background
colours.
CLS clear text area
CLG clear graphics area

                               60
Now to select the foreground colours for the two areas – for
example to obtain yellow letters (text foreground) type
COLOUR 2 and to get black graphics lines type
GCOL 0,0
Test this out by typing
DRAW 150,500
Although you start up (in mode 5) with the four colours set to
black, red, yellow and white, you can select other colours (still
of course only 4 at a time) by using VDU 19, as we saw on
page 10. See page 382 for more details of VDU 19.
So far we have been working in command mode. Next try
typing in this program. You can use mode 7 to type the
program in but nothing will happen until you run the program.
So, press BREAK and then the following
    10    MODE 5
    20    VDU 24, 0; 0; 500; 1000;
    30    VDU 28,10,20,19,5
    40    COLOUR 129
    50    COLOUR 2
    60    GCOL 0,130
    70    CLS : CLG
    80    FOR N=1 TO 1000
    90    PRINT "LINE"; N
   100    GCOL 0, RND(4)
   110    DRAW RND(500), RND(1000)
   120    NEXT N
   RUN
You might like to try saving this program on cassette as
described in section 5.

                                61
