# 9. More on variables

9 More on variables

In an earlier section the idea of ‘variables’ was introduced.
Variables are a fundamental concept in computing, and it is not
possible to go far without understanding them.
As we have seen, it is possible to say
LET X = 12
or just
X = 12
and the computer knows that it must label a ‘box’ in its
memory with the name X and that the current value of X is 12.
With a variable it is possible to alter the value of what is in the
‘box’ but not the name of the ‘box’ itself. The statement
X = 14
simply changes the value of X from 12 to 14. Similarly we can
say
X = X+1
which looks rather odd – like an equation which does not
balance. In fact all that this is doing is saying to the computer –
whatever the value inside your box ‘X’, make it increase by 1
from now on.
So far we have considered only ‘numeric’ variables – that is,
variables which contain numbers and on which arithmetic can
be carried out. But the computer has letters and symbols of
various kinds on its keyboard – what about them?

Numbers and characters
Although we can talk of the ‘number’ 22, we can also consider
22 as a pair of characters – in the same way as A, B, C, ?, $ are
characters. In computing it is important to be able to
distinguish between numbers and characters. Arithmetic can
be carried out on numbers but not on characters. To give you
                                 62
an example to show that this is not such an esoteric idea,
consider 22. We can divide 22 by 2 and get 11 if 22 is taken to be
a ‘number’. But if we talked about a train leaving ‘Platform 22’,
the 22 here would be a pair of characters. You cannot, with a
great deal of meaning, divide ‘Platform 22’ by 2 and get
‘Platform 11’.

Next it’s important to have a look at the other major kind of
variable used in computing – one which can hold characters,
not numbers. This is called a ‘string’ variable.

String variables
String variables are used to store “strings of characters” e.g.
words. They can be recognised easily because they always end
with a dollar sign. Here are a few examples of string variables
containing various strings of characters. Note that these strings
must be enclosed by quotation marks.

X$ = "HELLO"
DAY$ = "SUNDAY 3RD JANUARY"
NAME$ = "ALEX"
In the first example X$ is called a string variable and HELLO is
called a string. Once X$ has been set to contain HELLO we can
use statements like
PRINT X$
in just the same way as we said on page 24.
Z = 5
PRINT Z
String variables can be used to hold any number of characters
between zero (empty) and 255 (full)
X$ = "" will empty X$
X$ = "A" will set X$ to contain 1 character
Of course you cannot use ordinary arithmetic on string
variables. For example
NAME$ = "SUSAN"
PRINT NAME$ / 10
does not make sense. You can’t divide Susan’s name into 10
parts. Whilst you can add, subtract, multiply and divide using

                               63
numeric variables the only similar operation that can be carried
out on a string variables is that of “addition”. Thus
  10 A$ = "TODAY IS "
  20 B$ = "SUNDAY"
  30 C$ = A$ + B$
  40 PRINT C$
>RUN
TODAY IS SUNDAY
The importance of understanding string variables cannot be
over-emphasized. Later sections develop the idea.

How numbers and letters are stored in the
computer’s memory
Each memory location in the computer can be used to store any
number between, and including, 0 and 255, and yet some way
has to be found to store letters and also very large numbers. A
number of codes are used in the computer in much the same
way that different groups of people have used different codes
to count. Thus the number 1982 can also he written as
     MCMLXXXII        in Roman numerals
or   1982             in decimal Arabic numerals
or   7BE              in hexadecimal Arabic
or   11110111110      in binary.
The need to transmit and store letters has produced another set
of codes. The letter “J” is coded in various ways thus
.---      in Morse
1001010   in ascii binary
4A        in ascii hexadecimal
74        in ascii decimal.
The ascii (American Standard Code for Information
Interchange), is by far the most common code used by
computers to represent characters. A complete code table is
given on page 490.
When you tell the computer
A$ = "HELLO"
it stores the ascii codes for the letters in the word HELLO in
successive memory locations. The fact that they are stored as

                                 64
ascii codes is really irrelevant – as far as the user is concerned,
it just works. However, there are times when the user needs to
know about the ascii codes and two functions are provided to
convert between “characters” and ascii codes.
The function ASC converts a character into its ascii code. Thus
PRINT ASC("J")
would print 74.
The reverse function, of converting an ascii code into a
character, is performed by CHR$.
Thus PRINT CHR$(74) would print the letter J. In fact,
one quite often needs to use PRINT CHR$, so there is a
further shortened version of that statement. It is VDU. So
VDU 74 would also print the letter J.
Those doing more complicated programming will need to
know the exact way that the computer stores strings and
numerics in memory. Full information is given at the end of
section 39.
Real and Integer Variables
The numeric variables you have met so far are technically
known as “real variables”. They can be used to store any
number between
170 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 (1.7´1038)
and 0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 0012
(1.2´10-39), and can include a decimal point. Of course a similar
range of negative numbers can be stored too. The problem with
real numbers is that they are only stored to 9 figure accuracy,
nonetheless this is quite accurate enough for most purposes.
Another type of numeric variable is an ‘integer’ variable.
Integer variable names are distinguished by having a percent
sign as the last character of the variable name. They can only
store whole numbers between –2,147,483,648 and 2,147,483,647.
On the other hand integer variables are held with complete
accuracy – so accounting problems can be dealt with to the
nearest penny in £2M. Arithmetic calculations with integer
variables are significantly faster than with real variables. (See
section 32 for other suggestions for speeding up programs).
The two integer operators MOD and DIV are described on page
130.

                                65
The variables A% to Z% are special in that they are
permanently allocated space in memory. Typing RUN or NEW
does not destroy them. As a result the variables A% to Z% can
be set in one program and then used in another program later
on without losing their values. Of course the values will be lost
if the machine is switched off but otherwise they will remain,
even if BREAK is pressed. The welcome cassette uses the
variable M%, to inform each of the individual programs
whether or not the user’s cassette recorder has got automatic
motor control.
The variables A% to Z% are called the Resident Integer Variables.

Summary
Three main types of variables are supported in this version of
basic: they are integer, real and string.

                        integer         real          string

 example                  346          9.847        “HELLO”
 typical variable         A%             A             A$
 names                  SIZE%          SIZE           SIZE$
 maximum size        2,147,483,647   1.7´1038     255 characters
 accuracy               1 digit      9 sig figs         —
 stored in              32 bits       40 bits     ASCII values

All variable names can contain as many characters as required
and all characters are used to identify the variable. Variable
names may contain capital letters, lower case letters and
numbers and the underline character. Variable names must
start with a letter and must not start with a basic keyword.

                               66
