# 10. PRINT formatting

10 PRINT formatting
   and cursor control

This section describes the PRINT statement which is used to
put text on the screen or to a printer. It assumes that you
understand that a variable (such as X) can be used to hold a
number and that a string variable (such as A$) can be used to
hold a line of text.
The following program will help to illustrate some of the ideas.
Press BREAK and then type in the following program.
     10 X=8
     20 A$="HELLO"
     30 PRINT X, X, X
When this is run it produces this:
>RUN
               8                 8                8
This shows that commas separating items in the print list (the
print list is the list of things to be printed – X,X,X in this case)
will force items to be printed in columns or ‘fields’ ten
characters wide. Numbers are printed at the right hand side of
each column whereas words are printed on the left hand side.
You can see the difference if we add some lines to the program.
   10     X=8
   20     A$="HELLO"
   30     PRINT X,X/2,X/4
   40     PRINT A$,A$,A$
>RUN
               8                 4                2
HELLO            HELLO            HELLO
                     field
                    width

                                67
Field widths in different screen modes
As we said above, the width of each ‘field’ is automatically set
to ten characters when the computer is switched on.
Since the computer can operate in different screen modes,
displaying either 20 or 40 or 80 characters to the line, clearly the
number of fields which can be displayed on the screen will
differ depending on the mode. So try typing in a new line and
re-running the program above.
5 MODE 5
or, if you have a model B machine
5 MODE 0

   80 character modes      40 character modes      20 character modes
    (modes 0 and 3)       (modes 1, 4, 6 and 7)     (modes 2 and 5)

Note: the widths of the fields can be altered by the use of a
special command @% (see page 70).
So commas between items in the print list always put things in
columns or ‘fields’. On the other hand semi-colons between
items in the print list cause items to be printed next to each
other, without spaces:
   10 X=8
   20 A$="HELLO"
   30 PRINT A$; X; A$; X; X
>RUN
HELLO8HELLO88
Of course if the first item is a number it will be printed to the
right of a ‘field’ unless it is preceded by a semi colon.
     10 X=8
     20 A$="HELLO"
     30 PRINT X; A$; A$

                                 68
>RUN
                8HELLOHELLO
or
   10 X=8
   20 A$="HELLO"
   30 PRINT ;X;A$;A$
>RUN
8HELLOHELLO

As well as printing variables and string variables as shown
above the computer can print any characters placed in between
pairs of inverted commas exactly as they have been typed in,
providing they are in a print statement. The next program asks
for your name and remembers it in the string variable N$.
   10 PRINT "WHAT IS YOUR NAME ";
   20 INPUT N$
   30 PRINT "HELLO ";N$;". HOW ARE
YOU?"
>RUN
WHAT IS YOUR NAME ?JOHN
HELLO JOHN. HOW ARE YOU?
Notice the semi-colon at the end of line 10 that makes the
computer stay on the same line while it waits for you to provide
it with a value for N$. Without the semi-colon this happens:
>RUN
WHAT IS YOUR NAME
?JOHN
HELLO JOHN. HOW ARE YOU?
Note also the space after the word HELLO and before the word
HOW in line 30. Without these spaces the words run together to
produce.
HELLOJOHN.HOW ARE YOU?
It is quite legitimate to do calculations in a print list – for
example
     10 X=4.5
     20 PRINT X,X+2,X/3,X*X
>
>RUN
   4.5                 6.5               1.5            20.25

                                  69
but look what happens if instead of X = 4.5 we put X = 7
   10 X=7
   20 PRINT X,X+2,X/3,X*X
>RUN
          7        92.33333333                              49
because X/3 is 2.33333333 it makes the number move left in the
field until it immediately follows the previous field which
contains a 9 and appears to give a result 92.33333333, which is
misleading. For this reason, amongst others, the next section is
important if you want to print out a lot of numbers.

Altering the width of the field and the way in which
numbers are printed
It is often useful to be able to specify the width of the field
when printing columns of figures or words and also to be able
to specify the number of decimal places to which numbers will
be printed.
On the BBC Microcomputer this can be done by setting a
special ‘variable’ (called @%) in a particular way. For the
moment this must be treated as a bit of ‘magic’ but, for
example, if we write
@%=&20209
then this statement tells the computer to print in a field 9
characters wide, and that numbers will be printed with a fixed
number of decimal places – in this case, to 2 decimal places.
The following program shows this being used:
    5 @%=&20209
   10 X=7
   20 PRINT X,X+2,X/3,X*X
>RUN
     7.00     9.00     2.33                        49.00

For the more technically minded
@% is made up of a number of parts
&                2                 02               09
(Means           Format            2 decimal        field width
Hexadecimal      number 2 i.e.     places           of 9
numbers          fixed number                       characters
follow)          of decimal places

                               70
@%=&20309 would give Format 2, 3 decimal places and field
width of 9 characters.
     5 @%=&20309
   10 X=7
   20 PRINT X,X+2,X/3,X*X
>RUN
     7.000    9.000   2.333                    49.000
If you want 4 decimal places and a field width of 12 you would
put the following
     5 @%=&2040C
   10 X=7
   20 PRINT X,X+2,X/3,X*X
>RUN
       7.0000     9.0000                       2.3333
49.0000
The & tells the computer that the numbers which follow are
‘hexadecimal’ numbers – that is, numbers based not on 10s but
on 16s. For the sake of completeness, here is a list of
hexadecimal numbers (which include the letters A to F)
       Decimal number                    Hex number
              0                               0
              1                               1
              2                               2
              3                               3
              4                               4
              5                               5
              6                               6
              7                               7
              8                               8
              9                               9
             10                               A
             11                               B
             12                               C
             13                               D
             14                               E
             15                               F
             16                              10
             17                              11
             18                              12
             19                              13
             20                              14
                              71
A few points:
1 The maximum number of significant figures is 9
2 Format 1 gives Figures as exponential values
  Format 2 gives figures to a fixed number of decimal places
  Format 0 is the ‘normal’ configuration
3 To set the print format back to its normal value (Format 0
  and field width 10), set @%=10

TAB(X)
As well as controlling the print layout by using the comma and
semi-colon one can use the TAB statement to start printing at a
particular place on the screen. You will remember that there
can be 20, 40 or 80 characters to the line depending on the
mode. mode 7 has 40 characters. Try this:
    10   PRINT "012345678901234567890"
    20   F=16
    30   REPEAT
    40   PRINT TAB(10);F;TAB(15);2*F
    50   F=F+1
    60   UNTIL F=18
>
>RUN
012345678901234567890
          16   32
          17   34
TAB(10) prints the value of F ten spaces from the left and
then TAB(15) prints the value of 2*F fifteen spaces from the
left, on the same line. Note the semi-colon after TAB(10) –
this causes the computer to begin printing at that point.
Be sure to place an open bracket immediately after the word
TAB. If you leave a space between them, thus: TAB (10) the
computer will not understand and will report
No such variable
If you are beyond the place that you tell the computer to tab to,
for example in position 15 with a request to TAB(10), then
the computer moves to the next line and then tabs ten spaces.

                               72
Type in this replacement line
   40 PRINT TAB(15);F;TAB(10);2*F
>RUN
012345678901234567890
               16
          32
               17
          34

TAB(X,Y)
A useful extension of the TAB statement allows print to be
placed at any specific character location anywhere on the
screen. You will remember that in MODE 7 the text
co-ordinates are
     0          X                39
 0

Y

24

This program counts to 1000, printing as it goes
          5   CLS
         10   Q=1
         20   REPEAT
         30   PRINT TAB(18,5);Q
         40   Q=Q+1
         50   UNTIL Q=1000
The two numbers in the brackets after TAB represent the X and
Y text co-ordinates where printing should start (see also the
program on page 132).

Advanced print positioning
Using PRINT TAB(X,Y) allows text etc to be printed in
any character ‘cell’ in the appropriate MODE. In mode 5 there
are 20 cells across the screen and 32 cells (lines) down the

                                73
screen. Sometimes it is useful to be able to position characters
on a much finer grid. The statement VDU 5 enables text to be
printed at the exact position of the graphics cursor. The
statement MOVE can be used to position text. Note that this will
not work in mode 7. You will remember that the graphics screen
is addressed thus
1023

   Y

   0
       0         X                   1279
in all modes except mode 7.
A few sums will show that each character cell is 32 graphic
units high and, in a 40 character mode such as mode 4, 32 units
wide. Suppose we want to subscript a letter to produce for
example the chemical formula H2 this can he done as follows
     10 MODE 4
     20 VDU 5
     30 MOVE 500,500
     40 PRINT "H";
     50 MOVE 532,484
     60 PRINT "2"
     70 VDU 4
Note that the letter H is positioned with its top left corner at
500,500. The 2 is then printed one character to the right (532)
and half a character down (484). Again the top left of 2 is at
532,484.
A neater way of achieving the same effect is to replace line 50
with
PLOT 0,0,-16
One further feature of the BBC computer which is not normally
available on “personal” computers is the ability to superimpose

                                74
characters. One obvious use of this facility is to generate special
effects such as accents and true underlining. The short
program below prints the word rôle with the accent
correctly placed.
       10   MODE 4
       20   VDU 5
       30   X=500
       40   Y=500
       50   MOVE X,Y
       60   PRINT "role"
       70   MOVE X+32,Y+16
       80   PRINT"^"
       90   VDU 4
Once in VDU 5 mode the screen will not scroll up if you reach
the bottom of the page, instead the writing will start from the
top of the screen again. In addition characters will be
superimposed on those already on the screen. When in VDU 5
mode you can only print things in the graphics window and
not in the text window, and colour is selected with the GCOL
statement. VDU 5 will not work in text-only modes such as
modes 3, 6 and 7.

Cursor control
The text cursor is the flashing line on the screen which shows
where text will appear if it is typed in on the keyboard. The text
cursor also indicates where text will be printed on the screen by
a PRINT statement. The cursor can be moved around the
screen by a number of special “control codes” amongst which
are
code    effect
 8      move cursor left
 9      move cursor right
10      move cursor down
11      move cursor up
These code numbers can be used either with the VDU
command e.g. to move left four spaces, use either
VDU 8,8,8,8
or
PRINT CHR$(8);CHR$(8);CHR$(8);CHR$(8);

                                75
clearly the VDU command is simpler to type in in most cases.
In addition to the codes shown above the user can use the
PRINT TAB(X,Y) statement to move the cursor directly to
any character position on the screen. As we’ve seen in mode 7
the screen can contain up to 25 lines (numbered 0 to 24) of up
to 40 characters per line.

     0            X               39
 0

 Y

24

The position marked on the diagram above is 18 positions
across and 6 lines down. The cursor could be moved directly
there with the statement
PRINT TAB(18,6);
Note that the opening bracket must immediately follow the
word TAB thus TAB( and not TAB (.
Exactly the same effect can be obtained with the statement
VDU 31,18,6
The cursor can be moved to the “home” position at the top left
of the screen with the statement
VDU 30
If the user wishes to clear the screen as well as move the cursor
to the home position then he or she can use the statement
VDU 12
The last of the VDU commands directly to do with cursor
control is
VDU 127 which moves the cursor left and deletes the
character there. If you wish to delete the next four characters

                               76
and then return the cursor to its initial place you could use
VDU 9,9,9,9,127,127,127,127

Cursor ON/OFF
In some applications the flashing cursor can be a distraction.
It can be turned off with the statement
VDU 23,1,0;0;0;0;
and can be turned back on with the statement
VDU 23,1,1;0;0;0;
or by changing screen mode with the MODE statement.

Note: In version 0.1 of the operating system the statement
VDU 23;8202;0;0;0;
must be used to turn the cursor off.

                               77
