# 11. Input

11 Input
The previous section showed how to get information out of the
computer and on to the screen. This section deals with getting
things from the keyboard into the computer. When a program
is running there will often be a need for it to request some
information from the person at the keyboard.
   10 PRINT "HOW OLD ARE YOU"
   20 INPUT AGE
   30 IF AGE<18 THEN PRINT "YOU ARE TOO
YOUNG AT ";
   40 IF AGE=18 THEN PRINT
"CONGRATULATIONS ON BEING ";
   50 IF AGE>18 THEN PRINT "YOU ARE
PAST IT IF YOU ARE ";
   70 PRINT ;AGE
>RUN
HOW OLD ARE YOU
?22
YOU ARE PAST IT IF YOU ARE 22
Line 20 of the above program prints a question mark on the
screen and then takes in everything that is typed on the
keyboard until RETURN is pressed. Line 20 says INPUT AGE
so the computer is expecting a number since AGE is a numeric
variable rather than a string variable (see section 9). If words
are supplied instead of numbers then the computer assumes
that the number is zero.
>RUN
HOW OLD ARE YOU
?I DON'T KNOW
YOU ARE TOO YOUNG AT 0
Because line 20 said INPUT AGE a number was expected. If
you want to INPUT a string (word or group of words) then
you must place a string variable (e.g. NAME$) on the input
line.

                               78
   10 PRINT "WHAT IS YOUR NAME"
   20 INPUT NAME$
   30 PRINT "HELLO ";NAME$;" HOW ARE
YOU?"
>RUN
WHAT IS YOUR NAME
?JOHN
HELLO JOHN HOW ARE YOU?
You must follow the word INPUT with a numeric variable if
you are expecting a number and with a string variable if you
are expecting a string.
As you will have seen from the examples above you usually
need to print a question on the screen to tell the person at the
keyboard what you are waiting for. In the last example the
question was “What is your name”. Instead of placing this in a
separate PRINT statement you can include the question on the
INPUT statement.

   20 INPUT "WHAT IS YOUR NAME ",NAME$
   30 PRINT "HELLO ";NAME$;" HOW ARE
YOU?"
>RUN
WHAT IS YOUR NAME ?SUSAN
HELLO SUSAN HOW ARE YOU?
Notice the punctuation between the question “What is your
name” and the string variable NAME$. It is a comma. Notice
also that the computer printed a question mark after the
question when the program was run. It always prints a
question mark on an INPUT statement if a comma is used to
separate the question from the string variable. If you leave the
comma out of the program the computer will leave the
question mark out when the program is RUN.
   20 INPUT "WHAT IS YOUR NAME " NAME$
   30 PRINT "HELLO ";NAME$;" HOW ARE
YOU?"

>RUN
WHAT IS YOUR NAME STEPHEN ALLEN
HELLO STEPHEN ALLEN HOW ARE YOU?

                               79
The INPUT statement, which we have explored above,
requires that the user presses the RETURN key after he or she
has entered the reply. Until the RETURN key is pressed the
user can delete errors with the DELETE key or delete the
whole entry so far with CTRL U.
Several inputs can be requested at one time. If you type
    10 INPUT A,B
    20 PRINT A,B
two numbers will be expected by the computer. They can either
be typed in separated by commas, or both can be followed by
RETURN.
The INPUT statement will ignore leading spaces and anything
after a comma unless the reply is inside quotation marks.
    10 INPUT A$
    20 PRINT A$

>RUN
?ABC,DEF
ABC
The INPUT LINE statement can be used in the same way as
INPUT, but it will accept everything that is typed, including
leading spaces and commas. Replace line 10 by
    10 INPUT LINE A$

>RUN
?ABC,DEF
ABC,DEF
Of course if you make the program
    10 INPUT A$,B$
    20 PRINT A$,B$
you will get
>RUN
ABC,DEF
ABC             DEF
because now two different inputs are needed in line 10

                               80
