# 12. GET, INKEY

12 GET, INKEY

Sometimes it is useful to be able to detect a key as soon as it is
pressed without having to wait for the RETURN key to be
pressed. For example most games react immediately a key is
pressed. There are a group of four functions which respond to
single keystrokes:
GET
GET$
INKEY
INKEY$
The GET and GET$ functions wait until a key is pressed
whereas the INKEY and INKEY$ pair give up after a while if
no key is pressed.
100 A$ = GET$
will wait (for ever) until a key is pressed whereas
100 A$ = INKEY$(200)
will wait for only 2 seconds (200 hundredths of a second). If no
key is pressed within 2 seconds then the computer will move
on to the next line of the program and A$ will be empty. If a
key was pressed after say one second then the computer will
immediately move on to the next line of the program and will
put the “character typed” into A$.

  100 PRINT "DO YOU WANT TO GO ON"
  110 PRINT "YOU HAVE 2 SECONDS TO
REPLY"
  120 A$=INKEY$(200)
  130 IF A$="" THEN PRINT "TOO LATE YOU
MISSED IT"
  140 IF A$="Y" THEN PRINT "COURAGEOUS
FOOL!"
  150 IF A$="N" THEN PRINT "COWARD"

                                81
One of the most common uses of GET$ is to wait at the bottom
of a page for a person to press any key when they are ready to
go on
   100 A$ = GET$
GET and INKEY are very similar to GET$ and INKEY$ but
instead of returning a character which can be put into a string
variable they return a number which is the ascii code of the
character. The ascii code of “Y” is 89 and the ascii code of “N”
is 78, so the last program could be re-written as
  100 PRINT "DO YOU WANT TO GO ON"
  110 PRINT "YOU HAVE 2 SECONDS TO
REPLY"
  120 A=INKEY(200)
  130 IF A=-1 THEN PRINT "TOO LATE YOU
MISSED IT"
  140 IF A=89 THEN PRINT "COURAGEOUS
FOOL!"
  150 IF A=78 THEN PRINT "COWARD"
You will see that “no reply” returns the value –1 when using
INKEY and returns an empty string when using INKEY$.

Advanced features
Another important use of INKEY and GET is with the group
of four direction keys at the top of the keyboard. Normally
these are used for editing but a special statement can make
these keys produce ascii codes like all the other keys on the
keyboard. They can then be used by a program for some special
purpose – for example to move a point around the screen. The
statement *FX 4,1 makes the editing keys produce ascii
codes and the statement *FX 4,0 returns the keys to their
editing function. The keys produce the following codes
COPY 135 or (&87)
   f 136 or (&88)
   g 137 or (&89)
   i 138 or (&8A)
   h 139 or (&8B)
For example:
    10 *FX 4,1
    20 MODE 4

                               82
    30    X=500
    40    Y=500
    50    REPEAT
    60      PLOT 69,X,Y
    70      K=GET
    80      IF K=136 THEN           X=X-4
    90      IF K=137 THEN           X=X+4
   100      IF K=138 THEN           Y=Y-4
   110      IF K=139 THEN           Y=Y+4
   120      UNTIL Y=0
   130    *FX 4,0
This program waits at line 70 for a key to be pressed. The
program shown above would often be part of a much larger
program in which case one would not want everything to stop
until a key is pressed. Here it would be better to use
K=INKEY(0) at line 70 which will let the computer have a
quick look to see if a key has been pressed but not wait at all.
    10    *FX 4,1
    20    MODE 4
    30    X=500
    40    Y=500
    50    REPEAT
    60      PLOT 69,X,Y
    70      K=INKEY(0)
    80      IF K=136 THEN           X=X-4
    90      IF K=137 THEN           X=X+4
   100      IF K=138 THEN           Y=Y-4
   110      IF K=139 THEN           Y=Y+4
   120      UNTIL Y=0
   130    *FX 4,0

                               83
