# 13. TIME, RND

13 TIME, RND

TIME
The BBC computer contains an ‘elapsed time’ clock. That
means that the clock ticks away at a hundred ticks per second
but it does not know the real time. However, you can set it and
read it. Once set it will stay running until you turn the power
off or you do a ‘hard reset’ (see page 142). It can be set to any
value, for example 0,
TIME = 0
This program will print a running stopwatch in the middle of
the screen:
      5   CLS
     10   T = TIME
     20   PRINT TAB(10,12);(TIME-T)/100;
     30   GOTO 20
There is a program to print a 24 hour clock on page 131.

RND
When writing games (and simulations), we very often want the
computer to make a random choice – or to pick a random
number. The most useful function for this is RND(X) which
picks a random number between 1 and X. The program below
prints out a new random number between 1 and 6 every time a
key is pressed: rather like throwing a dice.
     10 PRINT RND(6)
     20 G=GET
     30 GOTO 10
and this program draws random triangles in random colours
     10   MODE    5
     20   PLOT    85,RND(1200),RND(1000)
     30   GCOL    0,RND(3)
     40   GOTO    20

                               84
Sometimes it is useful to be able to re-set the random number
generator to a known value. That may sound a bit strange but
when testing a program it is sometimes convenient to have a
predictable set of “random numbers”! To do this the number in
brackets after the RND must be a negative number. Thus
X=RND(-8) will ensure that the number sequence resulting
from RND(6) is repeatable.

                             85
Structure within
BASIC
When building a house there are a number of options: one can
chop trees down and tie them together to form a hut, one could
use straw and mud if one had the skill to deal with those
materials or one can use ‘building blocks’ like windows, doors
and bricks. Whichever materials one selects the planning and
construction is made much easier if one has a clear
understanding of the available structures.
The same type of argument applies when writing a computer
program to solve a particular problem. A number of program
structures are available and it is well worth while learning what
each can do. If you are attempting a trivial job (making an
orange box or adding up a set of numbers) then little or no
planning is needed. On the other hand, building an extension to
your house or writing a computer program to play a game does
require planning if it is not going to ‘crash’ without warning.
This planning will involve the use of a number of ‘structures’.
Here are the main structures available on the BBC computer.
REPEAT...UNTIL
FOR...NEXT
IF...THEN...ELSE
PROCEDURES
FUNCTIONS
GOSUB
ON...GOTO
ON...GOSUB

                               86
