# 14. REPEAT, UNTIL, TRUE, FALSE

14 REPEAT, UNTIL,
   TRUE, FALSE

Computers are fundamentally pretty stupid things but their
power comes from their ability to repeat things many times –
sometimes many millions of times in one second. In this
version of basic two types of repeating loops can be used.
They are called REPEAT...UNTIL and FOR...NEXT
loops. This section explains REPEAT...UNTIL loops and
the next chapter deals with FOR...NEXT loops.
Do you remember the story about a man starting with one
grain of rice and doubling it each time he won a bet? How
many times would he have to double his grains of rice to own
more than a million grains? In the following program C is a
counter showing how many times the number of grains has
doubled and X represents the number of grains of rice.
   10    X=1
   20    C=0
   30    REPEAT
   40    X=X*2
   50    C=C+1
   60    UNTIL X>1000000
   70    PRINT C,X
>RUN
             20      1048576
Lines 30 to 60 are called a REPEAT...UNTIL loop and
everything within the loop is repeated until X is greater than
one million.
The “terminating condition” in this program is that X is greater
than 1000000.
The next program terminates after 15 seconds. Line 40 reads
the starting time and the program repeats until the present

                               87
time minus the starting time is greater than 1500 hundredths of
a second – the internal clock ticks a hundred times a second.
   10 PRINT "SEE HOW MANY SUMS YOU"
   20 PRINT "CAN DO IN 15 SECONDS"
   30 PRINT
   40 STARTTIME=TIME
   50 REPEAT
   60 F=RND(12)
   70 G=RND(12)
   80 PRINT "WHAT IS ";F;" TIMES "G;
   90 INPUT H
  100 IF H=F*G THEN PRINT "CORRECT"
ELSE PRINT "WRONG"
  110 PRINT
  120 UNTIL TIME-STARTTIME>1500
  130 PRINT "TIME UP"
>RUN
SEE HOW MANY SUMS YOU
CAN DO IN 15 SECONDS
WHAT IS 6 TIMES 9?72
WRONG
WHAT IS 1 TIMES 4?4
CORRECT
WHAT IS 9 TIMES 8?72
CORRECT
TIME UP
REPEAT...UNTIL loops are very useful and should be
used frequently. The next program selects random letters (line
20) and times how long it takes you to find and press the
appropriate key. It uses two REPEAT...UNTIL loops.
One of them is used to wait for a particular key to be pressed
on the keyboard.

                              88
   10 REPEAT
   20 Z=RND(26)+64
   30 PRINT
   40 PRINT "PRESS THE KEY MARKED ";
CHR$(Z)
   50 T=TIME
   60 REPEAT UNTIL GET=Z
   70 PRINT "THAT TOOK YOU"(TIME-T)/100
" SECONDS"
   80 UNTIL Z=0
>RUN
PRESS THE KEY MARKED Y
THAT TOOK YOU 1.1 SECONDS
PRESS THE KEY MARKED G
THAT TOOK YOU 1.03 SECONDS
Lines 10 and 80 are the main loop and line 60 is a single line
REPEAT...UNTIL loop.
Look at line 80. This will stop the REPEAT...UNTIL loop if
Z=0. However Z is calculated in line 20 and will have a value
between 65 and 90. It will never equal zero, so the program will
never stop of its own accord – you have to press the ESCAPE
key.
Line 80 says
     80 UNTIL Z=0
Z = 0 will never be “true”. Z = 0 will always be “false”, so line
80 can be replaced with
     80 UNTIL FALSE
which just means “go on for ever”. This is a far better way of
doing things than using Z=0 because you might decide to
change Z next time you looked at the program. It is also better
to use REPEAT...UNTIL loops in this way than to put at
line 80
     80 GOTO 20
Using REPEAT...UNTIL keeps this section of the program
neatly together. See page 117 for a comment on GOTO.

                               89
If you delete line 10, then the computer will meet an UNTIL
statement at line 80 with no idea of where the loop is meant to
start
>RUN
PRESS THE KEY MARKED A
THAT TOOK YOU 2.09 SECONDS
No REPEAT at line 80
In summary REPEAT...UNTIL should be used for loops
which must terminate on some specific condition.

                               90
