# 16. IF...THEN...ELSE, TRUE and FALSE

16 IF…THEN…ELSE
   More on TRUE
   and FALSE
The IF...THEN statement has been used in several of the
programs earlier in this book – for example, in the program on
page 88 which checked your multiplication. Line 100 was:
IF H=F*G THEN PRINT "CORRECT" ELSE
PRINT "WRONG"
As you will realise, this type of statement enables the computer
to make a choice as it is working its way through the program.
The actual choice that it makes will depend on the value of H, F
and G at the time. As a result, the same program can behave in
quite different ways in different circumstances.

Multiple statement lines
It was explained earlier (page 54) that you can put more than
one statement on a line and this can be particularly useful with
the IF...THEN statement. Take, for example,
    10 X=4 : Y=6 : PRINT "HELLO"
    20 PRINT X+Y : X=X+Y : PRINT X+Y
>RUN
HELLO
             10
             16
which is just the same as
    10   X=4
    20   Y=6
    30   PRINT "HELLO"
    40   PRINT X+Y
    50   X=X+Y
    60   PRINT X+Y

                               98
This helps to understand how the computer treats multiple
statement lines using the IF...THEN statement. In the first
example which follows, K=6 and therefore the computer obeys
everything after the word THEN until the word ELSE. Note
that a colon only separates statements – the word ELSE must
be found if you want the other course of action to follow.
   10 K=6
   20 IF K=6 THEN K=9: PRINT "K WAS 6"
ELSE PRINT "K WAS NOT 6": PRINT "END OF
LINE"
>RUN
K WAS 6
(Note that line 20 was so long that it overflowed on the printer
but it is all part of line 20.)
Changing line 10 to K=7 causes the computer to execute
everything after the ELSE and as a result it prints
K WAS NOT 6
END OF LINE
IF...THEN is often used with more complicated conditions
involving the words AND, OR and NOT for example
IF X=5 AND Y=6 THEN PRINT "GOOD"
IF X=5 OR Y=6 THEN PRINT "TOO LARGE"
The word NOT reverses the effect of a condition, thus
IF NOT (X=6) THEN PRINT "X NOT 6"
These are powerful features which are easy to use.

For the slightly more advanced
It was explained above that you can use multiple statement
lines with IF...THEN but this leads to messy programs. It is
far better to use procedures if you want a whole lot of things to
occur. Thus:
  100 IF H=F*G THEN PROCGOOD ELSE
PROCBAD
This helps to keep the program readable which is very
important, not just from an aesthetic point of view but from the
very practical point that a readable program is much easier to
get right!

                               99
More on TRUE and FALSE
On page 89 the concept of true and false was introduced. A
variable can have a numeric value (e.g. 6 or 15) or it can be
TRUE or FALSE. In fact this is just playing with words (or
perhaps we should say numbers) since the computer
understands TRUE to have the value -1 and FALSE to have
the value 0.
   10 IF 6=6 THEN PRINT "YES" ELSE
PRINT "NO"
>RUN
YES
This prints YES because 6=6 is true
     5 H=-1
   10 IF H THEN PRINT "YES" ELSE PRINT
"NO"
>RUN
YES
The above program prints YES because H is true since it has
the value –1.
     5 H=0
   10 IF H THEN PRINT "YES" ELSE PRINT
"NO"
>RUN
NO
This program sets H = FALSE at line 5 and so the program
prints NO. –1 implies true and 0 implies false. What about
other values of H? In fact all non-zero values (except non-
integers from –1 to +1) are regarded as true as the following
shows.
     5 H=-55
   10 IF H THEN PRINT "YES" ELSE PRINT
"NO"
>RUN
YES

                              100
Here are some other peculiar examples
    10 G = (6=6)
    20 PRINT G
>RUN
             -1
because (6=6) is true.
    10 IF 5-6 THEN PRINT "TRUE"
>RUN
TRUE
This works because (5-6) is –1 which is true.
These tricks are more than academic. They can be very useful –
not least sometimes in trying to fathom out what on earth the
computer thinks it is doing!

                              101
