# 17. Procedures

17 Procedures

The BBC computer has a very complete version of basic – often
called “Extended basic” and in addition it includes the ability
to define and use procedures and functions. It is probably the
first version of basic in the world to allow full procedure and
function handling. These extremely powerful features enable
the user to structure his or her programs easily and in addition
provide a real introduction to other computer languages like
pascal.
A procedure is a group of basic statements which can be
“called by name” from any part of a program.
   10 REM REACT
   20 REM JOHN A COLL
   30 REM BASED ON AN IDEA BY THEO
BARRY, OUNDLE
   40 REM VERSION 1 / 16 NOV 81
   50 @%=&2020A
   60 ON ERROR GOTO 470
   70 MODE 7
   80
   90 PROCINTRO
  100 REPEAT
  110   PROCFIRE
  120   PROCSCORE
  130   UNTIL FNSTOP
  140 END
  150
  160 DEF PROCINTRO
  170 PRINT "This program tests your
reactions"
  180 PRINT
  190 PRINT "Press the space bar to
continue"
  200 REPEAT UNTIL GET=32
  210 CLS
                              102
  220 ENDPROC
  230
  240 DEF PROCFIRE
  250 CLS
  260 PRINT "Press the space bar"
  270 PRINT "as soon as a cross
appears"
  280 T=TIME
  290 R=RND(200)+100
  300 REPEAT UNTIL TIME>T+R
  310 PRINT TAB(17,10);"+"
  320 *FX 15,1
  330 REPEAT UNTIL GET=32
  340 DELAY=TIME-T-R
  350 ENDPROC
  360
  370 DEF PROCSCORE
  380 PRINT TAB(0,22);
  390 PRINT "You took "; DELAY/100;"
seconds"
  400 ENDPROC
  410
  420 DEF FNSTOP
  430 PRINT"Do you want another go?"
  440 REPLY$=GET$
  450 = (REPLY$="N") OR (REPLY$="n")
  460
  470 @%=10
The program above shows how named procedures and
functions can be used. The main program is between line 90
and line 140
    90 PROCINTRO
   100 REPEAT
   110   PROCFIRE
   120   PROCSCORE
   130   UNTIL FNSTOP
   140 END

The program tests a person’s reactions by measuring how long
it takes him to notice a cross on the screen. As you will see
from the section above, line 90 calls a procedure which gives an

                              103
introduction. The procedure is called PROCINTRO and it
produces the following on the screen.
This program tests your reactions
Press the space bar to continue
Then the program repeats PROCFIRE and PROCSCORE
until the user indicates that he or she does not wish to
continue. PROCFIRE produces this
Press the space bar
as soon as a cross appears
+
and PROCSCORE produces this
You took 2.03 seconds
It all seems very straightforward and logical – and so it is.
Using procedures enables you to split a problem up into a
number of small manageable sections and to use (or call) those
sections with a sensible name. The main section of most
programs should be just a number of procedure calls as are
lines 90 to 140. The procedures themselves should be in a
separate section – after the END statement.
Let us examine PROCINTRO more closely
  160 DEF PROCINTRO
  170 PRINT "This program tests your
reactions"
  180 PRINT
  190 PRINT "Press the space bar to
continue"
  200 REPEAT UNTIL GET=32
  210 CLS
  220 ENDPROC
Notice how it is defined: line 160 is the start of the definition
and the procedure ends at line 220 between those lines are
normal basic statements. Lines 170, 180 and 190 just print
messages on the screen. Line 200 waits until the space-bar is
pressed, after which line 210 clears the screen.
There are a number of more complex things that can be done
with procedures and another program will illustrate the use of
parameters – variables passed to the procedure from the main
program.

                                104
    10    REM HYPNO
    20    REM TIM DOBSON / ACORN COMPUTERS
    30    REM VERSION 2 / 16 NOV 81
    40    MODE 5
    50    VDU 29,640;512;
    60
    70    FOR X=510 TO 4 STEP -7
    80      GCOL 0,X
    90      PROCBOX(X)
   100      NEXT
   110
   120    REPEAT
   130      GCOL RND(4),RND(4)
   140      FOR K=0 TO 500 STEP 8
   150        PROCBOX(K)
   160        NEXT K
   170      GCOL RND(4),RND(4)
   180      FOR K=500 TO 0 STEP -9
   190        PROCBOX(K)
   200        NEXT K
   210      UNTIL FALSE
   220    END
   230
   240    DEF PROCBOX(J)
   250    MOVE -J,-J
   260    DRAW -J,J
   270    DRAW J,J
   280    DRAW J,-J
   290    DRAW -J,-J
   300    ENDPROC
The program uses a procedure called PROCBOX which draws
a box. The size of the box is determined by the parameter J in
the procedure. However you will see that in line 90 the
procedure is called with the statement PROCBOX(X). The
initial value of X will be 510 because that is the starting value of
the FOR loop at line 70. This value of X (510) will be passed to
the parameter J in the procedure. As a result the procedure
PROCBOX will draw a box of “size” 510. J is called the “formal
parameter” for the procedure since it is used in the procedure
itself. However the X in line 90 and the K in line 150 are
referred to as actual parameters. Whatever value K has in line
150 will be transferred to the formal parameter J.

                                105
A procedure may have any number of parameters but there
must be exactly the same number of actual parameters when
the procedure is called as there are formal parameters in the
procedure definition. Thus if a procedure was defined like this
 1000 DEF PROCSWITCH(A,B,C$)

 1040 ENDPROC
it could not be called with a statement like
   150 PROCSWITCH(X,Y)
but this would be acceptable
   150 PROCSWITCH(length, height, NAME$)

Local variables in procedures
     10   J=25
     20   FOR X=1 TO 5
     30     PROCNUM(X)
     40     PRINT "OUT OF PROCEDURE J= ";J
     50     NEXT X
     60   END
     70   DEF PROCNUM(J)
     80   PRINT "IN PROCEDURE J= ";J
     90   ENDPROC

>RUN
IN PROCEDURE J= 1
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=              25
IN PROCEDURE J= 2
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=              25
IN PROCEDURE J= 3
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=              25
IN PROCEDURE J= 4
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=              25
IN PROCEDURE J= 5
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=              25

In the program above the variable J is used in two ways. The
main program starts at line 10 and ends at line 60. The

                               106
procedure is defined between lines 70 and 90. Line 10 declares
that J has the value 25 and the value of J is not changed in the
main program. However J is used as the formal parameter in
the procedure. All formal parameters are local to the
procedure which means that their value is not known to the
rest of the program. Inside the procedure, J takes on the value
of the actual parameter X, but outside the procedure it has a
different value. The distinction is made between global
variables and local variables. Global variables are known to
the whole program, including procedures, whereas local
variables are only known to those procedures in which they are
defined and to procedures within that procedure.
In the program above, X is a global variable and it looks as if J
is global too, since it is defined in line 10 of the main program.
In fact that J is global but the use of the parameter J in the
procedure creates another variable J which is local to the
procedure. If a different parameter had been used in the
procedure definition then J would have remained global. Thus
in the print-out below the formal parameter has been changed
to K in line 70, which leaves J as a global variable.
     10   J=25
     20   FOR X=1 TO 5
     30     PROCNUM(X)
     40     PRINT "OUT OF PROCEDURE J= ";J
     50     NEXT X
     60   END
     70   DEF PROCNUM(K)
     80   PRINT "IN PROCEDURE J= ";J
     90   ENDPROC

>RUN
IN PROCEDURE J= 25
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=               25
IN PROCEDURE J= 25
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=               25
IN PROCEDURE J= 25
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=               25
IN PROCEDURE J= 25
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=               25
IN PROCEDURE J= 25
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=               25

                               107
The program is pretty pointless in its present form for several
reasons – not least because it doesn’t actually do anything with
K in the procedure!
Now that J is global its value could be altered anywhere –
including inside the procedure. Line 75 increases J by 10:
     10   J=25
     20   FOR X=1 TO 5
     30     PROCNUM(X)
     40     PRINT "OUT OF PROCEDURE J= ";J
     50     NEXT X
     60   END
     70   DEF PROCNUM(K)
     75   J=J+10
     80   PRINT "IN PROCEDURE J= ";J
     90   ENDPROC
>RUN
IN PROCEDURE J= 35
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=              35
IN PROCEDURE J= 45
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=              45
IN PROCEDURE J= 55
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=              55
IN PROCEDURE J= 65
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=              65
IN PROCEDURE J= 75
OUT OF PROCEDURE J=              75
It has been pointed out that all formal parameters are local to
the procedure in which they are defined (and to inner
procedures) but other variables can be declared as LOCAL if
required. We very often use the variable X as a counter for a
FOR...NEXT loop and as a result you have to be careful not
to use it twice in the same section of a program. Declaring X as
local to a procedure ensures that its use locally will not affect
the value of X outside the procedure.
     10 J=25
     20 FOR X=1 TO 5
     30   PROCNUM(X)
     40   PRINT "OUT OF PROCEDURE J= ";J
     50   NEXT X
     60 END

                               108
    70   DEF PROCNUM(K)
    72   LOCAL X
    75   FOR X=1 TO 10
    80     J=J + J/X
    85     NEXT X
    90   ENDPROC
>RUN
OUT OF     PROCEDURE        J=   275
OUT OF     PROCEDURE        J=   3025
OUT OF     PROCEDURE        J=   33275
OUT OF     PROCEDURE        J=   366025
OUT OF     PROCEDURE        J=   4026275
In the program above, X is used twice – once in the main
program (lines 20 to 50) and secondly, and quite separately, as
a LOCAL variable in the procedure. J remains global.
It is wise to declare variables as LOCAL in procedures and
functions wherever possible (except when the variable is a
formal parameter).

                              109
