# 18. Functions

18 Functions

Functions are in many ways similar to procedures but there
is one major difference – they always calculate a result which
may be a number or a string. basic already contains a
number of functions. For example the function SQR returns
the square root of a number. The square root of 16 is 4 so the
statements
Y = SQR(16)
and
PRINT SQR(16)
make sense. The first example calculates the square root of 16
and places the result in Y. Compare this to a procedure – for
example the one above, to draw a box. The procedure makes
things happen (a box appears on the screen) but it does not
produce a numeric or a string value. Functions always produce
a numeric or string result.
If you have a reasonable understanding of procedures and
parameters then you can probably cope with this example of a
function:
      10 PRINT "GIVE ME THREE NUMBERS ";
      20 INPUT A,B,C
      30 PRINT "THE SUM OF THE NUMBERS IS
";
      40   PRINT FNSUM(A,B,C)
      50   END
     100   DEF FNSUM(X,Y,Z)
     105   LOCAL K
     110   K=X+Y+Z
     120   =K

GIVE ME THREE NUMBERS ?2,4,4
THE SUM OF THE NUMBERS IS                             10
                              110
Again this program is not of much use – we are using a sledge
hammer to crack a nut – but we had better learn to walk before
we run!
The function is defined in lines 100 to 120 and three parameters
are passed to the function. A, B and C are the actual parameters
and the numbers in A, B and C are passed to formal parameters
X, Y and Z. For the sake of illustration a local variable K has
been used. Line 110 sets K equal to the sum of X, Y and Z. Line
120 shows the way in which a function is ended. It says that the
function FNSUM has the value of K.
The example above was spread out to show how a function can
be constructed – it could have been compressed to
      10 PRINT "GIVE ME THREE NUMBERS ";
      20 INPUT A,B,C
      30 PRINT "THE SUM OF THE NUMBERS IS
";
      40   PRINT FNSUM(A,B,C)
      50   END
     100   DEF FNSUM(X,Y,Z)
     120   = X+Y+Z
or even to the single line function shown below
      10 PRINT "GIVE ME THREE NUMBERS ";
      20 INPUT A,B,C
      30 PRINT "THE SUM OF THE NUMBERS IS
";
      40 PRINT FNSUM(A,B,C)
      50 END
     100 DEF FNSUM(X,Y,Z) = X+Y+Z
Of course we could have managed without a function at all…
      10 PRINT "GIVE ME THREE NUMBERS ";
      20 INPUT A,B,C
      30 PRINT "THE SUM OF THE NUMBERS IS
";
      40 PRINT A+B+C
      50 END
… and clearly that would have been the right thing to do in this
case. However as soon as your programs reach 40 or 50 lines

                              111
you should be using procedures extensively and functions
occasionally.
As mentioned at the start of this section, functions can be used
to calculate a numeric or a string result. The function which
follows returns the middle letter of a string. The string is
passed as a parameter
   100    DEF FNMID(A$)
   110    LOCAL L
   120    L=LEN(A$)
   140    =MID$(A$,L/2,1)
Again, the function is terminated by a statement starting with
an equal sign. To use the above function type in the following
additional lines
     10 INPUT Z$
     20 PRINT FNMID(Z$)
     30 END
Notice that the function is placed beyond the END statement
where it will not be executed except by being called by name.

                              112
