# 20. ON GOTO, ON GOSUB

20 ON GOTO,
   ON GOSUB

There is often a need, in a computer program, to proceed in
one of a number of directions. For example your program
might present a “menu” of 8 options for the user to choose
from. When the user has made the choice your program will
need to branch off in the appropriate direction. There are a
number of ways of doing this. Here is one in part of a
program
   100   MODE 7
   110   PROCINTRO
   120   REPEAT
   130     PROCMENU
   140     IF M=1 THEN          PROCOscar7
   150     IF M=2 THEN          PROCOscar8
   160     IF M=3 THEN          PROCUOSAT
   170     IF M=4 THEN          PROCorbit
   180     IF M=5 THEN          PROCtransmit
   190     IF M=6 THEN          PROCshowfigs
   200     IF M=7 THEN          PROCMercator
   210     IF M=8 THEN          PROCLocator
   220     IF M=9 THEN          PROCgetdatetime
   230     UNTIL M=-1
   240   END
Lines 140 to 220 provide exits to a number of procedures all of
which will automatically return to the main program. Which
procedure is selected depends on the value of M as selected by
the user during the procedure PROCMENU.
The above method is easy to understand and is recommended
but there are other methods which have their place. The
statement ON...GOTO also provides a number of exits.
   100 ON M GOTO 1000,1200,1250,1600

                              118
would provide an exit to line 1000 of the basic program if M =
1. If M = 2 then control will pass to line 1200 and so on.
An alternative format is
   100 ON M GOSUB 1000,1200,1350
In this case control is passed to the subroutines indicated and
then returned to the next line.
Both these techniques are widely used but are less clear than
the use of procedures as indicated at the beginning of this
section.

                               119
