# 21. Yet more on variables

21 Yet more on
   variables

Arrays
Quite often we use the computer to store and manipulate sets
of data rather than just a single value. For example, we might
want to calculate wages for a group of people or sort a group of
20 numbers into order. The 20 numbers might well be
associated with 20 names. Arrays make it a lot easier to deal
with groups of names and numbers. To get to a more
manageable example let’s consider working with five names
and their associated year of birth. We could store the five
names in five variables like this:
N1$   =   "SARDESON"
N2$   =   "MATTINSON"
N3$   =   "MOIR"
N4$   =   "ALLEN"
N5$   =   "MOUNT"
That is quite reasonable and it works. If you say
PRINT N2$
the computer will then print out MATTINSON.
However, you cannot tell it to print out the 5th entry or the
fourth entry. The computer doesn’t have any way of knowing
that N5$ is the 5th entry. Using arrays, though, we can pick
out the 5th entry in a long list and that is very useful.
The first thing we have to do is to tell the computer how large
an array we are going to use. This is done with a DIM
statement – e.g.
DIM N$(5)
this creates an array (a table) and we can then say

                               120
N$(1)     =    "SARDESON"
N$(2)     =    "MATTINSON"
N$(3)     =    "MOIR"
N$(4)     =    "ALLEN"
N$(5)     =    "MOUNT"
If we follow that with
X = 1
and then say
PRINT N$(X)
the computer will print SARDESON.
Note that the X was a variable which, in this case, had the
value of 1.
Here is a complete program – as far as we have got.
    10    DIM N$(5)
    20    N$(1)="SARDESON"
    30    N$(2)="MATTINSON"
    40    N$(3)="MOIR"
    50    N$(4)="ALLEN"
    60    N$(5)="MOUNT"
    70    PRINT "WHICH ENTRY DO YOU WANT"
    80    INPUT X
    90    PRINT N$(X)
   100    GOTO 70
We could also define an array to contain the five years of birth
   200    DIM Y(5)
   210    Y(1)=1964
   220    Y(2)=1960
   230    Y(3)=1950
   240    Y(4)=1959
   250    Y(5)=1962
It would be easy to add lines to this program to make the
computer search for various things. Of course with only 5
entries it would undoubtedly be quickest to do the whole thing
manually – but with a hundred, a thousand or a million entries
the computer would be faster – and certainly more accurate. A
few examples of extra lines will make the use of these arrays
clearer.

                              121
To print out everyone born before 1963
   300 FOR X=1 TO 5
   310 IF Y(X)<1963 THEN PRINT N$(X)
   320 NEXT X
or to print out everyone whose name contains more than 5
letters
   400    FOR X=1 TO 5
   410    J$=N$(X)
   420    IF LEN (J$)>5 THEN PRINT J$
   430    NEXT
or print out every one whose name begins with M,
   500    FOR X=1 TO 5
   510    J$=N$(X)
   520    IF LEFT$(J$,1)="M" THEN PRINT J$
   530    NEXT
All these things can only be done if the computer is able to
select a position in a list and it can only do this with arrays.
Note: for an explanation of how the last examples worked, see
section 22.
You will have noticed that we used the array N$(X) to store
strings (the names of the people), and array Y(X) to store
numbers (the year of birth). Each element of the array N$(X)
can store as long a name as you want (up to 255 characters) and
you can DIMension N$ to have as many entries as you want.
For example, DIM N$(1000) would create a string array
with space for 1000 different names. N$(X) is called a “string
array” since it is used to store strings.
The array Y(X) is called a “numeric array” and again it can
have as many elements (entries) as you need – e.g. DIM
Y(2000). You can also have “integer numeric arrays” like
DIM J%(100).

As usual on the BBC computer the story doesn’t finish there!
There is another whole group of arrays which we haven’t met
yet. The arrays we have met (both string and numeric) are all
“single dimension arrays” and could be illustrated by this
diagram.

                                122
               Y(1)      Y(2)          Y(3)   Y(4)      Y(5)
               1964      1960          1950   1959     1962
Now suppose we wanted to store the day and month of the
birthday as well as the year. We need more boxes.
                 21        12             4     24        19
                   2         2            2     10        12
               1964      1960          1950   1959     1962
A set of data like that is called a “5 by 3 array” and the (empty)
boxes can be set up by the statement
     10 DIM Y(5,3)
The array could then be filled with the statements
     20   Y(1,1)=21
     30   Y(1,2)=2
     40   Y(1,3)=1964
     50   Y(2,1)=12
     60   Y(2,2)=2
     70   Y(2,3)=1960                  etc.

In practice it would involve a lot less typing, and make the
program shorter, if all the figures were held in DATA
statements. You may well need to skip this section at first and
return to it when you have understood section 22 which deals
with the keywords READ, DATA and RESTORE.
If you use READ and DATA to fill the above 5x3 array the
program could look like this

    10    DIM Y(5,3)
    20    FOR COLUMN=1 TO 5
    30      FOR ROW=1 TO 3
    40        READ Y(COLUMN,ROW)
    50        NEXT ROW
    60      NEXT COLUMN
   500    DATA 21,2,1964
   510    DATA 12,2,1960
   520    DATA 4,2,1950
   530    DATA 24,10,1959
   540    DATA 19,12,1962

                                 123
The program above takes successive numbers from the DATA
statements and inserts them into the array. Once this program
has been run the array will be set up – full of the figures – and
other sections of the program (not shown above), could search
the array as required. The array above is a “two-dimensional
array” used to store numbers. The phrase “two dimensional”
refers to the fact that there are 5 entries in one dimension and 3
entries in another dimension – a total of 15 entries. A three
dimensional array could be defined with the statement
DIM W(4,5,6)
and for a four dimensional array with
DIM T(2,2,5,3)
This last array would have 2x2x5x3 (60) individual entries.
Actually, array elements can be numbered from zero instead of
1, so an array declared with
DIM V(3)
has, in fact, got 4 elements which are V(0), V(1), V(2),
and V(3). Similarly the array T(2,2,5,3) has 3x3x6x4
(216) elements and will take up over 1000 bytes of memory.
Multi-dimension arrays are voracious memory eaters – only
use them when needed and, if at all possible, use every element
that you set up. There is no limit, other than lack of memory,
on the number of dimensions in an array.
At the start of this section we set up a string array with the
statement DIM N$(5).
This contains 6 elements N$(0) to N$(5). The length of
each string element is limited to the usual 255 characters but
you can have as many elements as you wish and as many
dimensions – just as for numeric arrays. String arrays are even
more ravenous for memory than numeric arrays – use them
sparingly!
Just to make sure that the various possibilities are clear, here is
a program to set up a string array with first names as well as
last names. The program reads names and dates into two
arrays:

                                124
   10 DIM Y(4,2)
   20 DIM N$(4,2)
   30 FOR COLUMN=0 TO 4
   40   FOR ROW=0 TO 2
   50     READ Y(COLUMN, ROW)
   60     NEXT ROW
   70   FOR ROW=0 TO 2
   80     READ N$(COLUMN, ROW)
   90     NEXT ROW
  100   NEXT COLUMN
  500 DATA 21,2,1964, JAMES,C,SARDESON
  510 DATA 12,2,1960, A, MICHAEL,
MATTINSON
  520 DATA 4,12,1960, CHARLES,C,MOIR
  530 DATA 24,10,1959, STEPHEN, R,
ALLEN
  540 DATA 19,12,1962, GAVIN,,MOUNT

                  125
