# 24. String handling

24 String handling

It has been explained that the BBC computer can store words or
other groups of characters in string variables. There are a
number of functions which can be used with strings. For
example if A$ = "NOTWITHSTANDING" then the string
function LEFT$ can be used to copy, say, the left 3 letters of
A$ into another string – B$.
     10 A$="NOTWITHSTANDING"
     20 B$=LEFT$(A$,3)
     30 PRINT B$
>RUN
NOT
Similarly MID$ can be used to extract the middle section of a
string. Change line 20 thus
     10 A$="NOTWITHSTANDING"
     20 B$=MID$(A$,4,9)
     30 PRINT B$
>RUN
WITHSTAND
Line 20 can be read as “B$ is a copy of the middle of A$ starting
at the fourth letter and going on for 9 letters”. As a result of this
other flexible use of the word “middle”, MID$ can in fact be
used to copy any part of a string. Change the program again
     10 A$="NOTWITHSTANDING"
     20 B$=MID$(A$,1,7)
     30 PRINT B$
>RUN
NOTWITH
As well as LEFT$ and MID$ there is the string function
RIGHT$ which copies the rightmost characters of a string.
     10 A$="NOTWITHSTANDING"
                                135
     20 B$=RIGHT$(A$,4)
     30 PRINT B$
>RUN
DING
It is easy to join two strings together to make a long string by
using the “string concatenation operator” which is a plus sign.
Its title sounds grand but its purpose is obvious – but quite
different from its arithmetic use.
     10   A$="NOTWITHSTANDING"
     20   B$=LEFT$(A$,3)
     30   C$=" LIKELY"
     40   D$=B$+C$
     50   PRINT D$
>RUN
NOT LIKELY
The numeric function LEN can be used to count up the number
of characters in a string – in other words how long it is
     10 A$="NOTWITHSTANDING"
     20 X=LEN(A$)
     30 PRINT X
>RUN
             15
LEN is very useful if you don’t know how long a string is going
to be. For example in this palindrome testing program A$ is
copied backwards letter by letter into B$.
    5 REPEAT
    7   B$=""
   10   INPUT "What would you like to
reverse? " ' A$
   20   FOR T=LEN(A$) TO 1 STEP -1
   30     B$=B$ + MID$(A$,T,1)
   40     NEXT T
   50   PRINT '"If you reverse"'
A$'"you get" ' B$
   60   UNTIL A$=""
The numeric function INSTR can be used to see if there is a
particular letter (or group of letters) in another string.

                              136
     10   A$="NOTWITHSTANDING"
     20   B$="T"
     30   X=INSTR(A$,B$)
     50   PRINT X
>RUN
               3

You will notice that it finds that there is a T at position 3 in A$.
Sometimes it is useful to be able to start the search further
along the string. To do this you can add a third parameter
which gives that position to start the search.
     10   A$="NOTWITHSTANDING"
     20   B$="T"
     30   X=INSTR(A$,B$,4)
     50   PRINT X
>RUN
               6
If no match is found then INSTR returns zero.
     10   A$="NOTWITHSTANDING"
     20   B$="Z"
     30   X=INSTR(A$,B$,4)
     50   PRINT X
>RUN
               0
This looks like the elements of the game called Hangman! But
first three more string related functions. It is possible to make a
string containing many copies of another string by using the
string function STRING$. So to make a string containing 20
copies of "ABC" we write:
     10 A$="ABC"
     20 B$=STRING$(20,A$)
     30 PRINT B$
>RUN
ABCABCABCABCABCABCABCABCABCABCABCABC
ABCABCABCABCABCABCABCABC
There is also a function STR$ which converts a number into a
string.

                                137
     10   A=45:B=30
     20   A$=STR$(A)
     30   B$=STR$(B)
     40   PRINT A+6
     50   PRINT A$+B$
>RUN
             75
4530
>
i.e. line 40 treats A and B as numbers; and line 50 as string
characters.
Note that STR$ is effected by the special variable @% if this
has been set (see page 70).
The opposite function is VAL. This extracts the number from
the start of the string, which must, start with a plus + or minus
— sign or a number. If it doesn’t a zero is returned. Numbers
which are imbedded in other characters are ignored. So
     10 A$="124ABC56"
     20 PRINT VAL(A$)
will print 124.
However, back to the outline of a hangman program.

   10 MODE 7
   20 W=RND(12): REM 12 WORDS TO CHOOSE
FROM
   30 FOR X=1 TO W
   40   READ A$
   50   NEXT X
   60 REM WE HAVE SELECTED A RANDOM
WORD
   70 REM NOW GIVE THE USER CHANCES TO
   80 REM GUESS LETTERS IN THE WORD
   90 L=LEN(A$)
  100 CORRECT=0
  110 TRIES=0
  120 PRINT TAB(0,5);"The word has ";
L;" letters"

                               138
  130 PRINT TAB(0,6);"You have ";2*L;"
tries"
  140 REPEAT
  150   PRINT TAB(10,7);"GUESS A
LETTER";
  160   G$=GET$
  170   PRINTTAB(25,7);G$
  180    P=0
  190   REPEAT
  200      P=INSTR(A$,G$,P+1)
  210      IF P<>0 THEN PRINT TAB(P+12,
15);G$
  220      IF P<>0 THEN
CORRECT=CORRECT+1
  225      IF P=L THEN P=0
  230      UNTIL P=0
  240    TRIES=TRIES+1
  250   PRINT TAB(0,0);"TRIES ";TRIES;
TAB(20,0);"CORRECT ";CORRECT
  260   UNTIL (CORRECT=L OR TRIES=2*L)
  270 IF CORRECT=L THEN PRINT
TAB(10,20); "Congratulations"
  280 IF TRIES=2*L THEN PRINT
TAB(0,16);"The word was ";A$
  290 DATA NOTWITHSTANDING
  300 DATA INQUISITION
  310 DATA MONUMENTAL
  320 DATA PRESCRIPTION
  330 DATA CARNIVEROUS
  340 DATA TENTERHOOK
  350 DATA DECOMPRESSION
  360 DATA FORTHCOMING
  370 DATA NEVERTHELESS
  380 DATA POLICEWOMAN
  390 DATA SOPHISTICATED
  400 DATA GUESSTIMATE
There are a number of improvements to be made to this
program. Its screen layout is poor and also it lets you guess the
same letter twice.

                               139
It is possible to use some mathematical operators on strings.
For example one can check to see if two strings are “equal” or if
one string is “greater” than another. Obviously the words
“equal” and “greater” have slightly unusual meanings when
applied to strings. A few examples may help to clarify things.
As far as the computer is concerned, “XYZ” is greater than
“ABC” because X is further down the alphabet than A.
Similarly, “ABC” is greater than “AB” because “ABC” is a
longer string.
You can use the following comparisons with strings:

=    equal to
<>   not equal to
<    less than
>    greater than
<=   less than or equal to
>=   greater than or equal to
The following are legal statements:
IF A$ ="HELLO" THEN PRINT "HOW ARE YOU"
IF B$ >"FIFTEEN" THEN GOTO 1000
Notice that if B$ contained SIX it would be regarded as
greater than FIFTEEN because it starts with an S whereas
FIFTEEN starts with an F.
     10 B$ = "SIX"
     20 IF B$ > "EIGHT" THEN STOP
This program would stop because the word SIX begins with
an S which is regarded as “greater than” the letter E.
Strings are compared character by character using ascii codes.
If two strings start with some sequence of letters, for example
PIN and PINT then the longer string is regarded as the larger
one.

                                140
