# 25. User Defined Keys

25 Programming the
   red User Defined
   Keys

At the top of the keyboard is a group of special red keys which
are called User Defined Keys. Instead of producing a fixed
character the user can ‘define’ these keys to generate any
character or string of characters that is required. For example,
to set up key f1 so that it produces the word PRINT every time
it is pressed you can type
*KEY 1 PRINT               RETURN
To set key f2 to produce the word DATA you enter
*KEY 2 DATA                RETURN
If you want to enter more than one word into a User Defined
Key then you can enclose the words in inverted commas
*KEY 3 "IF X="             RETURN
though quote marks are not necessary.
When you are developing programs it is very useful to have
one of the keys set up to change to MODE7 and then LIST the
program automatically. If you were typing in the commands
MODE7 and LIST you would normally follow each with a
RETURN, and you have to include something equivalent to
press the RETURN key when you set the key up. In fact you
enter this to set up key f0.
*KEY 0 MODE 7 ¦M LIST ¦M
The two characters ¦ and M together are understood to mean
the same thing as pressing the RETURN key. In fact the ¦ in
front of any letter makes the computer generate a control
character. You may remember that to enter “paging mode”,
                              141
where the computer stops at the bottom of every page, you can
type CTRL N. That instruction can be added to the key f0
definition as well, if you wish.
*KEY 0 MODE 7 ¦M ¦N LIST ¦M
It is important to remember that any *KEY definition must be
the last statement on a line because since the computer finds a
* at the start of a statement it passes the whole of the rest of the
line to the Machine Operating System and not to basic. The
Machine Operating System does not understand : which basic
would understand as a multiple statement separator. The same
thing applies to *FX statements – only one is allowed per line.
However, it is acceptable to use colons to separate statements
within the key definition. For example
*KEY 6 MOVE 0,0 : DRAW X,Y ¦M
If you want to you can set up the user defined keys in a
program in exactly the same way that they are set up in
command mode.
Thus
10 *KEY 7 "¦B LIST¦M¦C"
would let key 7 turn the printer on, list the program and then
turn the printer off.
If you wish to include an ascii code greater than 128 (&80) then
you can do this by using, the sequence ¦! to add 128 to the
value produced. For example:
*KEY 8 "¦!¦V"
would put a single “character” in key 8 and the ascii value of
the character would be made up from the two parts. The ¦! is
worth 128 and the ascii value of CTRL V is 22, giving a total
value of 150.

The BREAK key
Pressing the BREAK key causes a “soft reset” which does not
reset the clock or clear the definitions of the user defined keys.
However, pressing BREAK while the CTRL key is pressed will
cause a “hard reset” which resets everything. This feature is
implemented from release 1.0 of the operating system.
Pressing BREAK and SHIFT together will be used in future to

                                142
“auto-boot” the machine so that the computer loads and runs a
program without any further instructions. Note that “auto-
boot” will not work on the cassette filing system.
As you know, when you press the BREAK key the computer is
reset and nothing can change that. Your program will stop and
all variables will be lost; even your program will appear to be
lost. However, there are a number of things that can be done to
alter the course of events.
First, a program can be recovered by typing, OLD RETURN and
then RUN RETURN . Alternatively, the BREAK key can be
‘redefined’ by using the expression
*KEY 10 "OLD ¦M RUN ¦M"
which treats the BREAK as another user-definable key.

Other keys

The                      and COPY keys can also be redefined –
they can be considered to be user defined keys 11 to 15 (see
also pages 422 and 423).
COPY 11

       12

       13

       14

       15

                              143
