# 26. Operator precedence

26 Operator
   precedence
An operator is something like +, /, < etc, which affects one or
more items – for example comparing them, or adding them.
Mathematical operators are familiar. Most act on two numbers
- for example
3+7     addition
2-5     subtraction
4*6     multiplication
1/9     division
7 DIV 4 integer division
7 MOD 4 integer remainder
3^4     raise to a power
These operators are referred to as binary operators since they
require two operands (i.e., two things to operate on)
-5
This shows one of the few ‘unary’ operators that we are used to
– the - just acts on the 5 to make it a negative number.
This version of basic has a large number of operators and it is
very important that the user is aware of their order of
precedence. You will remember that in mathematics
multiplication must be completed before addition – the same
applies to other operators – there is a strict hierarchy and you
must be aware of it if the computer is to do what you expect.
The overall order of precedence for operators is as follows.
Group 1        Unary minus
               Unary plus
               NOT
               functions
               brackets ( )
               indirection operators (see page 409)

                               144
Group 2        ^                     raise to the power
Group 3        *                     multiplication
               /                     division
               DIV                   integer division
               MOD                   integer remainder
Group 4        +                     addition
               -                     subtraction
Group 5        =                     equal to
               <>                    not equal to
               <                     less than
               >                     greater than
               <=                    less than or equal to
               >=                    greater than or equal to
Group 6        AND                   logical and bitwise AND
Group 7        OR                    logical and bitwise OR
               EOR                   logical and bitwise Exclusive OR

All operators in each group have equal priority and will be
dealt with on a left to right basis – in other words in order in
each line.
Some of the operators should be familiar by now; others may
need explanation.

Group 1
NOT is most often used to reverse the result of a test. e.g. IF
NOT (X=5) THEN... Clearly this example could be written
IF X <> 5 THEN but the operator NOT is often essential
when using functions e.g. IF NOT FNVALID THEN...
Functions include all the predefined functions such as SQR,
SIN, ASC etc and user defined functions like FNVALID.
Brackets can be used to ensure that everything within the
brackets is evaluated before any other calculations take place.
Indirection operators are described in section 39 on page 409.

Group 2
Raise to the power e.g.
3^2=9
3^3=27
                               145
Group 3 and Group 4
These contain all the usual arithmetic operators. Nothing
unexpected here.

Group 5
This contains the relational operators which mean ‘greater
than’, ‘less than’, etc. They are used in expressions such as
IF X>10 THEN ...

Group 6
Logical AND is used to ensure that two or more conditions
hold true before some action is taken e.g.
IF X>10 AND Y=6 THEN ...
For further details see the entry on page 205.

Group 7
Logical OR is also used with multiple conditions e.g.
IF X>10 OR Y=6 THEN ...
The action is taken if one or more of the conditions is true. EOR
is normally only used as a bitwise operator and the user is
referred to page 250 for details.

                               146
