# 27. Error handling

27 Error handling

If the computer is unable to deal with a situation such as this:
PRINT 3/0
then it will report the fact to you with an “Error message” and
then stop, waiting for your next command
>PRINT 3/0
Division by zero
If you are sitting at the keyboard playing with the machine this
is quite acceptable – in fact one of the main virtues of basic is
that it does try to give you an indication of why it is unable to
proceed. However if you are writing a program for someone
else to use, and you do not want them to be bothered with
error messages then you must take the precautions to deal with
every possible erroneous situation that might arise.
The major tool in error-handling is the statement
ON ERROR GOTO 5000
(the 5000 is for example – it could GOTO any line number you
like).
Once the computer has encountered an ON ERROR GOTO
statement it will no longer report errors and stop – instead it
will go to line 5000 (or wherever you have told it to go to). The
statement ON ERROR OFF makes the computer handle errors
normally again. The computer has an error number for every
error it may encounter and you can use the error number to
enable you to know what has gone wrong. The error number is
stored in the variable ERR. The error number for an attempt to
divide by zero is 18 for example.

     10 ON ERROR GOTO 2000
     20 PRINT "HELLO"
     30 PRINT 3/0
                               147
   40 PRINT "BYE"
   50 END
 2000 PRINT ERR
>RUN
HELLO
            18

The computer also remembers the line at which it detected the
error and this number is stored in the variable ERL.

   10    ON ERROR GOTO 2000
   20    PRINT "HELLO"
   30    PRINT 3/0
   40    PRINT "BYE"
   50    END
 2000    PRINT ERR
 2010    PRINT ERL
>RUN
HELLO
            18
            30

As you will see from the above the computer detected error
number 18 in line number 30. Instead of just printing an error
number the computer can be made to deal with the problem.
Look at the next program which will generate an error when X
gets to zero.

   100   X=-5
   110   PRINT X, 3/X
   120   X=X+1
   130   IF X<5 THEN GOTO 110
   140   END
>RUN
        -5      -0.6
        -4     -0.75
        -3        -1
        -2      -1.5
        -1        -3
         0
Division by zero at line 110

                             148
If we put an error handling routine in we can let the computer
deal with the problem itself.
   10     ON ERROR GOTO 1000
  100     X=-5
  110     PRINT X, 3/X
  120     X=X+1
  130     IF X<5 THEN GOTO 110
  140     END
 1000     IF ERR=18 THEN PRINT: GOTO 120
 1010     REPORT
>RUN
             -5           -0.6
             -4          -0.75
             -3             -1
             -2           -1.5
             -1             -3
              0
              1               3
              2             1.5
              3               1
              4            0.75
In the example program above error 18 was dealt with
successfully but line 1010 causes it to REPORT other errors in
the normal way without trying to deal with them.
It is usually easy, but tedious, to anticipate all the probable
errors but careful planning is needed if the error handling is to
be effective. In particular you should be aware that when an
error occurs you cannot return into a FOR...NEXT or
REPEAT...UNTIL loop or into a procedure or function or
subroutine. So long as you are aware of these limitations you
can program around them.

                               149
