# 28. Teletext and MODE 7

28 Teletext control
   codes and
   MODE 7
mode 7 is a Teletext compatible display mode which is very
economical in its use of memory. It can provide a full colour
text display with limited, but full colour, graphics. This mode is
strongly recommended for applications which do not require
very fine graphic detail.
mode 7 uses the standard Teletext control codes to change
colours rather than the BBC basic COLOUR and DRAW
statements. It cannot be over emphasized that mode 7 requires
different codes and statements from those available in modes 0
to 6. The mode 7 display consists of 25 lines of 40 characters.
Each line will normally consist of white letters and numbers
(text) on a black background. It the user wishes to change the
colour of the text or the background then a control code must
be sent to the screen with a PRINT or VDU statement. By way
of explanation let us examine one typical line of characters on a
mode 7 screen.
The screen display consists of 25 lines (numbered 0 to 24) each
containing up to 40 characters (0 to 39) columns

        0        columns             39
   0

lines

  24

                               150
Let us examine a typical line and see what is displayed on the
screen.
 0        1          2   3   4       5         6    7    8        9          10   11   12       13         14

 A       B           C       D      E          F         G H                 I         J        K          L
     white letters               red letters                 green letters                  blue letters

To get this on the screen you will need to type
>MODE 7
>PRINT "ABC";CHR$(129);"DEF";CHR$(130);
"GHI";CHR$(132);"JKL"
You will see that there is a space on the screen between the
letters ABC and the letters DEF. That space is in fact occupied
by an invisible “control code”. The control code ‘appears’ on
the screen as a space but it affects everything to its right. The
control code at position 3 is code number 129 and that has the
effect of turning all letters, and numbers that follow into red.
The code at position 7 is number 130 which produces green
alpha-numerics (letters and numbers).
Here is a list of a few more control codes
129           Alphanumeric red
130           Alphanumeric green
131           Alphanumeric yellow
132           Alphanumeric blue
133           Alphanumeric magenta
134           Alphanumeric cyan
135           Alphanumeric white
To change the colour of the text
To get these codes on the screen you have to type PRINT
CHR$(X) just before the text you want to alter, and where X
stands for the code you want. Often you will wish to put the
codes in between two words and you do that by placing both
the words and the CHR$(X) in one long PRINT statement
thus
   10 MODE 7
   20 PRINT "WHITE";CHR$(131);"YELLOW";
CHR$(135);"AND BACK TO WHITE"

                                                   151
To make things flash
Another code 136 makes everything that follows on that line
flash. Try
   10 MODE 7
   20 PRINT "HELLO";CHR$(136);"FLASHER!"
It must be emphasized that every line starts off in white,
non-flashing, normal height, black background and so on. If
you want to print a whole page in red letters then every line
must start with control code 129.
You should by now understand how to put the control codes
into a PRINT statement and so we can see what other effects
are available.
To change the background colour requires 3 control codes.
Suppose that you want blue letters on a yellow background
then you must use the following sequence of control codes
131 yellow alphanumeric
157 new background
132 blue alphanumeric
   10 MODE 7
   20 PRINT CHR$(131);CHR$(157);CHR$
(132);"BLUE LETTERS ON YELLOW"
As you will gather to change the background colour you must
first select letters of the desired colour, then declare a new
background and then reselect the colour of the letter. Note that
you cannot have a flashing background, so the following
sequence.
136   flash
131   yellow alphanumeric
157   new background
132   blue alphanumeric
will produce flashing blue letters on a steady yellow
background.
   10 MODE 7
   20 PRINT CHR$(136);CHR$(131);CHR$(
157);CHR$(132);"BLUE LETTERS ON YELLOW"
Flash is turned off with control code 137.

                              152
To produce double height characters
It is possible to write characters with double their normal
height using control code 141. Obviously this takes up two of
the normal display lines. What is not so obvious is that you
must therefore print exactly the same text on two successive
lines. Try the following:
   10 MODE 7
   20 PRINT CHR$(141);"THIS IS DOUBLE
HEIGHT"
As you will see it only produces the top half of the letters. Add
line 30 and it works properly.
   10 MODE 7
   20 PRINT CHR$(141);"THIS IS DOUBLE
HEIGHT"
   30 PRINT CHR$(141);"THIS IS DOUBLE
HEIGHT"
Of course you can have (for example) double height, flashing
red letters on a white background
141   double height
157   new background
129   red alphanumeric
136   flashing
   10 MODE 7
   20 PRINT CHR$(141);CHR$(157);CHR$
(129);CHR$(136); "THE LOT"
   30 PRINT CHR$(141);CHR$(157);CHR$
(129);CHR$(136); "THE LOT"
Double height is turned off with control code 140.
As you have came to appreciate it can be quite tedious typing
in CHR$(129) every time you want a Teletext control code.
To make things easier it is possible to use the red User Defined
Function Keys in combination with the SHIFT key to generate
these special codes. While pressing SHIFT the function keys
normally produce the codes shown in the table overleaf.

                               153
  f0     128     No effect
  f1     129     Alphanumeric         red
  f2     130           ”              green
  f3     131           ”              yellow
  f4     132           ”              blue
  f5     133           ”              magenta
  f6     134           ”              cyan
  f7     135           ”              white
  f8     136           ”              flash on
  f9     137           ”              flash off

As you will see f0 is set to produce code 128 and the other
keys produce higher numbers. 128 is said to be the “base
address” for the keys. The base address can be altered with
*FX 226 if you wish. See page 439 for more details.
Once you have a Teletext control code on the screen you can
use the editing keys (e.g. COPY) to copy it into another string.
This can be very useful.

Graphics
In addition to displaying coloured letters it is possible in
mode 7 to do a certain amount of work with graphics. The
graphics available in Teletext mode are certainly less easy to
use than in other modes but with a little patience some very
good effects can be achieved. Another set of control codes are
used to change lower case letters into small graphic shapes.
The shapes are all based on a two by three grid, the same total
size as a large letter.

If you want to use those graphic shapes instead of lower case
letters then you must precede them with one of the following
control codes:

                               154
145    red graphics
146    green graphics
147    yellow graphics
148    blue graphics
149    magenta graphics
150    cyan graphics
151    white graphics
Note that upper case letters will still show as letters in the
same colour that you have selected for the graphics. Thus
       10 PRINT CHR$(145);"ABCdefGHIjkl"
will show the following on the screen in red

(The full list of graphic shapes are given on pages 488 and 489).

Graphics codes
It is possible to calculate the code for any particular graphics
shape in the following way. Each of the six cells contributes a
certain number to the total code.

   1      2

   4      8

  16     64

and in addition you should add in 32 + 128 (i.e. 160). For example
the ascii code for

is 2 + 8 + 16 + 32 + 128 = 186.

                                  155
Making a large shape
Elsewhere in the guide it shows how to use user-defined
characters to draw a space ship (see page 172). By way of
comparison a similar but cruder space ship can be made in
Teletext Mode. Here is the design and the code number for
each graphic character

250                 245

255                 255

191                 239

To make these display as graphics characters each line must be
preceded by (for example) code 146 (green graphics). So the
following codes must be printed on the screen
146, 250, 245
146, 255, 255
146, 191, 239
These codes can be sent using PRINT CHR$( ) so long as
care is taken to get each in the correct place, e.g.
   10 MODE 7
   20 X=20
   30 Y=10
   40 PRINT TAB(X,Y);CHR$(146);CHR$
(154);CHR$(250);CHR$(245)
   50 PRINT TAB(X,Y+1);CHR$(146);CHR$
(154);CHR$(255);CHR$(255)
   60 PRINT TAB(X,Y+2);CHR$(146);CHR$
(154);CHR$(191);CHR$(239)
Instead of using PRINT TAB(X,Y) it is probably easier in
this case to use ascii codes to move the cursor down one line

                              156
(code 10) and back four spaces (code 8 four times). It is
probably also easier to use the VDU statement rather than
PRINT CHR$( ). If these two things are done then the
program becomes
     5    MODE 7
     6    PRINT TAB(20,10);
    10    VDU 146,154,250,245
    20    VDU 10,8,8,8,8
    30    VDU 146,154,255,255
    40    VDU 10,8,8,8,8
    50    VDU 146,154,191,239
   100    PRINT
A complete list of the Teletext control codes is given on pages
486 to 489.

Teletext graphics codes for the more adventurous
As you will have realised, the statements MOVE and DRAW are
not available in the Teletext mode (mode 7). If you wish to draw
lines in this mode you will need to use a suitable procedure – so
here is one. It uses a look-up table, called S%, to remember the
numbers corresponding to each of the 6 pixels (picture
elements), in a Teletext graphics character. The look-up table
must be set up at the beginning of the program:
     10 DIM S% 7
     20 !S%=&08040201
     30 S%!4=&4010
Next a row of teletext control codes must be written down the
left hand side of the screen to turn every line into a graphics
display
     40 PROCGR
and the associated procedure is
   200    DEF PROCGR
   210    LOCAL Y%
   220    VDU 12
   230    FOR Y%=0 TO 23
   240    VDU 10,13,&97
   250    NEXT
   260    ENDPROC

                              157
The main program follows – in this case to plot a “sin curve”:
     50   FOR X=0 TO 77 STEP 0.25
     60   PROCPLOT(X,35+35*SIN(X/10))
     70   NEXT
     80   END
and lastly here is the procedure to plot the point
  300     DEF PROCPLOT(X%,Y%)
  310     LOCAL C%,A%
  330     VDU 31,X% DIV2+1, 24-Y% DIV3
  340     C%=S%?((X% AND 1)+(2-Y%MOD3)*2)
  350     A%=135
  360     VDU (USR &FFF4 AND &FF00) DIV256
OR C%     OR 128
  370     ENDPROC
There is no need to know how it works but here is an
explanation in case you are interested.
The X and Y co-ordinates are put into X% and Y% and then line
330 moves the text cursor to the position X%, Y%.
Line 340 uses the look-up table (S%) to calculate the “value”
(in terms of ascii code), of the selected pixel at X%, Y%.
Setting A%=135 and jumping to the subroutine at &FFF4
returns the ascii code of the character which includes the spot
X%, Y%. See the example on page 432 which explains this
OSBYTE call for a similar example. The character read from
the screen is then ORed with the new pixel (C%) and written
with the VDU statement.
The &97 in line 240 produces white graphics dots. Other
values will give other colours. For example &91 would draw a
red graph.
Two improvements could be made; first we could test for
illegal values of X% and Y% with
  320 IF X%<0 OR X%>77 OR Y%<0 OR Y%>74
THEN ENDPROC
and secondly we could remember the position of the cursor
before we entered the procedure and restore the cursor to that
position at the end of the procedure. See page 432 for a similar
routine.

                               158
Notice that no reference need be made to actual memory
co-ordinates and this is vital if your programs are to work via
the ‘Tube’. You may not think it important now but you will
find that it is sensible to write programs using the machine
code calls provided and not to get in the habit of addressing
the memory directly.

                              159
