# 29. Advanced Graphics

29 Advanced
   Graphics

As we saw earlier, the following keywords can be used in a
variety of statements which produce high resolution graphics
effects on the screen:
MODE which selects a particular graphics mode
GCOL which selects the colour and drawing ‘style’ of any
graphics (except in modes 3, 6 or 7)
DRAW which draws lines (except modes 3, 6 or 7)
MOVE which moves the graphics cursor (except modes 3, 6 or
7)
PLOT which draws lines, dotted lines, points and colours in
triangles (except modes 3, 6 or 7)
VDU a versatile command which produces a wide variety of
effects.
These will only become familiar with use. What follows is a
description of how to use some of the keywords to produce a
selection of results on the screen.

How to change the screen display modes
The screen mode can be changed at any time by typing MODE
X, where X is the value 0 to 7 from the following list:
MODE 0 uses two colours (Model B only) with very high
       resolution and requires 20k of memory to “map” the
       screen
MODE 1 uses four colours (Model B only) with high
       resolution and requires 20K of memory
MODE 2 uses 16 colours (Model B only) with medium
       resolution graphics – 20k
MODE 3 text only – 16k (Model B only)
MODE 4 two colours and high resolution graphics – 10k
MODE 5 four colours and medium resolution graphics – 10k
MODE 6 text only – 8k

                             160
MODE 7 teletext (which is the subject of a separate section of
       this book) – 1k
In modes 0, 1, 2, 4 & 5 the screen is divided up into imaginary
rectangles, like a piece of graph paper. In mode 0 there are 640
´ 256 squares; in modes 1 and 4 there are 320 ´ 256 and in
modes 2 and 5 there are 160 ´ 256 (in other words, the higher
the resolution of the graphics the smaller the rectangle). The
higher the resolution, the more memory is used up in the
process of ‘mapping’ the screen.

How to draw lines
On page 495 you will find a graphics planning sheet which
shows the way the screen can be thought of as a piece of graph
paper, with each point having a horizontal (X) and a vertical
(Y) value. The ‘origin’ is point 0,0 and is at the bottom left of
the screen. Top right is 1279, 1023
How to draw a square in the centre of the screen
a Use the MOVE statement to move the graphics ‘cursor’ from
its home position (0,0) to a point where we can start drawing
(say 400 units along and 400 units up). First set up a screen
mode which can support graphics.
   100 MODE 5
   110 MOVE 400,400

b Draw a line horizontally to a point 800,400. The DRAW
command draws a line from the last point ‘plotted’ to a point
defined in the DRAW statement.
   120 DRAW 800,400

c Finish the box with three more DRAW statements
   130 DRAW 800,800
   140 DRAW 400,800
   150 DRAW 400,400
Run the program.

Changing the colour of the box
The normal foreground colour in mode 5 is white. Add the
following line
   105 GCOL 0,1

                               161
This changes the lines to “logical” colour 1, which in mode 5 is
red. mode 5 only has 4 colours. When the machine is switched
on they are black, red, yellow and white. However, logical
colours can be changed by using one of the VDU commands
(see later). So, if you know what you are doing you can select
any four colours in mode 5.
How to fill in with colour
PLOT 85,X,Y (see page 319) draws and then fills in a
triangle drawn from the last two plotted points to the point
defined by X and Y. The colour is the current graphics
foreground colour. Add the following line:
   160 PLOT 85,800,800
Run this program.
This will fill in one half of the square
Now add:
   170 PLOT 85,800,400
Run the program and the whole square should become red.

How to change colours
At any particular moment the computer can print and draw on
the screen using four colours. This page uses two “colours”: a
white background colour and a black foreground colour – that
is, black writing on a white background. Similarly, the
computer has a text background colour and a text foreground
colour but, in addition, it is aware of a graphics foreground
colour (used to draw lines), and a graphics background colour.
When you change mode the computer resets all these colours
thus
Text foreground colour – white
Text background colour – black
Graphic foreground colour – white
Graphic background colour – black
The number of colours that can appear on the screen together
depends on the mode selected. In modes 0, 3, 4 and 6 you can
only have two colours at any time and they are normally black
and white. In modes 1 and 5 you can have up to four colours at
any time and they are normally black, red, yellow and white. In
mode 2 you can have up to 16 different coloured effects.

                                162
Let us consider mode 5 for a moment and explore the effects
that are available. mode 5 is a four colour mode and the default
colours are black, red, yellow and white. As you may have
gathered, text and graphics are dealt with separately so to
change the colour that will be used for text output you say
COLOUR     0   to give black text
COLOUR     1   to give red text
COLOUR     2   to give yellow text
COLOUR     3   for white text.
However, to change the colour used for graphics, for example
to produce lines with the DRAW statement, you use these
statements
GCOL    0,0    black graphics
GCOL    0,1    red graphics
GCOL    0,2    yellow
GCOL    0,3    white
The two groups of statements above change the “text
foreground” and “graphics foreground” colours.
You will have noticed that, so far, 1 represents red, 2 is yellow
and so on. To change the background colours we add 128 to
these numbers. Thus COLOUR 129 will give a red text
background, and GCOL 0,129 would set the graphics
background colour to red.
For text, for example, to change from white lettering on black,
to black lettering on red in mode 5, type
MODE 5
COLOUR 129
COLOUR 0
CLS
All text will now be in black on red. Graphics will still appear
in white. To change text colours in the middle of a program
merely insert the appropriate colour statements before the print
statements to which they refer.
For graphics: use the GCOL statement which stands for
“Graphics COLours”. GCOL has two numbers after it (see page
262). The second number refers to the logical colour which is to
be used for graphics from now on. The first number is usually
set at 0.

                                163
So for example, to get red graphics lines on a yellow
background, type
COLOUR 131
GCOL 0,1
CLS
But suppose that you wanted a blue background in mode 5. So
far the only available colours have been black, red, yellow and
white and there is a limit of four colours in mode 5, but you can
make one of those four colours blue if you want to. You do this
with the statement
VDU 19,0,4,0,0,0
and then the four available colours would be blue, red, yellow
and white.
In mode 5 only four colours are available at a time and they are
referred to as ‘logical’ colours 0 to 3. In mode 5 ‘logical’ colour
0 is normally black, ‘logical’ colour 1 is normally red and so on
but you can change the “actual colour” of any of the “logical
colours” quite easily by using the VDU 19 statement followed
by five numbers, separated by commas.
In a two colour mode such as mode 4 we can do similar things
e.g.
MODE 4
VDU 19,1,2,0,0,0
changes logical foreground colour 1 (which is initially white) to
actual colour 2 which is green and
VDU 19,0,5,0,0,0
changes logical background colour 0 to actual colour 5, which
is magenta. (Note. The zeros at the end are for future expansion
of the system.) The computer will now produce these colours
until either it is switched off, the break button is pressed, or the
mode is changed. These instructions to change the colours can
be embedded in a program thus making it possible to alter the
colours while a program is running.
Here is a list of the numbers for each “actual colour” that the
computer can produce.

                                164
Actual colour number         Displayed colour
      0                            black
      1                            red
      2                            green
      3                            yellow
      4                            blue
      5                            magenta
      6                            cyan
      7                            white
      8                            flashing black-white
      9                            flashing red-cyan
     10                            flashing green-magenta
     11                            flashing yellow-blue
     12                            flashing blue-yellow
     13                            flashing magenta-green
     14                            flashing cyan-red
     15                            flashing white-black
So “actual colour” numbers are any numbers between 0 and 15.
To make logical 3 a flashing red-cyan effect you write
VDU 19,3,9,0,0,0
and here are a couple of other examples
VDU 19,1,2,0,0,0  logical colour 1 is green
VDU 19,3,5,0,0,0  logical colour 3 is magenta
VDU 19,0,12,0,0,0 logical colour 0 is flashing
                  blue-yellow

Having set the logical colours up in this way you could then
select logical colour 0 (flashing blue-yellow) as the text
foreground colour with COLOUR 0, or as the graphic
foreground colour with GCOL 0,0. The table opposite shows
how things are set up each time you change mode.

                             165
   Foreground colour                  Background colour
Logical Actual colour               Logical no Actual colour
Modes 0,3,4,6
 0       Black (0)                   128         Black (0)
 1       White (7)                   129         White (7)

Modes 1,5
 0       Black (0)                   128         Black (0)
 1       Red (1)                     129         Red (1)
 2       Yellow (3)                  130         Yellow (3)
 3       White (7)                   131         White (7)

Mode 2
 0        Black (0)                  128          Black (0)
 1        Red (1)                    129          Red (1)
 2        Green (2)                  130          Green (2)
 3        Yellow (3)                 131          Yellow (3)
 4        Blue (4)                   132          Blue (4)
 5        Magenta (5)                133          Magenta (5)
 6        Cyan (6)                   134          Cyan (6)
 7        White (7)                  135          White (7)
 8    Fl. Black/White (8)            136      Fl. Black/White (8)
 9    Fl. Red/Cyan (9)               137      Fl. Red/Cyan (9)
10    Fl. Green/Magenta (10)         138      Fl. Green/Magenta (10)
11    Fl. Yellow/Blue (11)           139      Fl. Yellow/Blue (11)
12    Fl. Blue/Yellow (12)           140      Fl. Blue/Yellow (12)
13    Fl. Magenta/Green (13)         141      Fl. Magenta/Green (13)
14    Fl. Cyan/Red (14)              142      Fl. Cyan/Red (14)
15    Fl. White/Black (15)           143      Fl. White/Black (15)

You will have noticed that the GCOL statement is followed by
two numbers.
The first number can be used to control the way that the colour
(which is selected by the second number), is affected by what is
already on the screen. The statement
GCOL 0,3
tells the computer that the graphics colour to be used is to be
logical colour 3 and that this is to appear no matter what was on

                              166
the screen under the new line or triangle. Values other than 0,
for the first number, have other effects. For example, a value of
4, as in GCOL 4,0 has the effect of drawing a line which is the
“inverse” logical colour to the colour that it is currently
crossing over.
In two colour modes the inverse of logical colour 0 is logical
colour 1. In four colour modes the following applies.

    Logical colour                Inverse
          0                          3
          1                          2
          2                          1
          3                          0

With ‘default’ actual colours of black, red, yellow and white the
inverse colours would be white, yellow, red and black.
In mode 2, the 16 colour effect mode, all steady colours
translate to flashing colours and vice versa as the next table
shows for the default colours.

Logical colour Default displayed colour       Inverse
      0        Black                          Flashing white/black
      1        Red                            Flashing cyan/red
      2        Green                          Flashing magenta/green
      3        Yellow                         Flashing blue/yellow
      4        Blue                           Flashing yellow/blue
      5        Magenta                        Flashing green/magenta
      6        Cyan                           Flashing red/cyan
      7        White                          Flashing black/white
      8        Flashing black/white           White
      9        Flashing red/cyan              Cyan
    10         Flashing green/magenta         Magenta
    11         Flashing yellow/blue           Blue
    12         Flashing blue/yellow           Yellow
    13         Flashing magenta/green         Green
    14         Flashing cyan/red              Red
    15         Flashing white/black           Black

                               167
Other values of the first number following GCOL enable the
logical colour to be plotted to be ANDed, ORed or
Exclusive-ORed with the logical colour presently on the screen.
The user is referred to pages 205, 316 and 250 for a description
of AND, OR and Exclusive-OR but the following examples
may help.
In mode 5 with the background set to red by the following
statements
MODE 5
GCOL 0,129
CLG
an attempt to draw a yellow line ORed with the background
colour by using the statement
GCOL 1,2
would in fact produce a white line since the background logical
colour is 1 and the new line is to be drawn in logical colour (1
OR 2), i.e. logical colour 3. The same principles apply to GCOL
2, which ANDs the new colour with the previously displayed
logical colour and to GCOL 3, which Exclusive-ORs the
colours together.
Obviously, an understanding of AND, OR and EOR is required
before all the GCOL statements can be used. The effects which
can be produced are very useful when it comes to the
production of sophisticated animation effects.

How to plot a point on the screen
The PLOT command can also be used to plot points.
Type MODE 4 (which is a 2 colour mode) and type
PLOT 69,500,500
This will plot a point in white at coordinates X=500, Y=500.
Type
PLOT 69,600,500
and another point will appear at X=600, Y=500.

How to remove a point selectively
Typing, CLG would clear the whole graphics area. However
instead of CLG, type

                              168
PLOT 70,500,500
and you will see that one of the two points has gone. This is
because PLOT 70 prints the ‘inverse’ colour at the given
point. This is particularly useful when ‘animating’, say, a point
(see below). In mode 4 the ‘inverse’ of logical colour 1 is logical
colour 0.
Suppose we want, say, a yellow dot on a blue background, we
need to change the foreground colour from white to yellow
and the background colour from black to blue. To do this, use
the VDU 19 command as described earlier
VDU 19,1,3,0,0,0
This alters logical colour 1 (this means the normal foreground
colour) to actual colour 3 (i.e. yellow).
Now type
VDU 19,0,4,0,0,0
This alters logical colour 0 (which is the normal background
colour) to actual colour 4 (i.e. blue).
PLOT 69,500,500
will now produce the desired effect.

Animation
How to make a ball and move it on the screen
This time we’ll write a program in steps to make a yellow ‘ball’
consisting of 4 dots which move on the screen on a red
background.

a Setting up mode and colours
     10 MODE 4
     20 VDU 19,1,3,0,0,0
     30 VDU 19,0,1,0,0,0

b Next a ‘procedure’ for creating a ball. This procedure will
be ‘called up’ whenever we want to create a ball on the screen
at a point (X,Y). It is good practice to tuck a procedure like this
away at the end of a program, so we’ll give it a high line
number. X and Y are called the parameters for this procedure.

                                169
 1000     DEF PROCBALL(X,Y)
 1010     PLOT 70,X,Y
 1020     PLOT 70,X,Y+4
 1030     PLOT 70,X+4,Y
 1040     PLOT 70,X+4,Y+4
 1050     ENDPROC
We use PLOT 70 rather than PLOT 69 to help the animation
which follows.

c Making, the ball travel horizontally at height Y = 500
     40   REM HORIZONTAL MOVEMENT
     50   FOR N = 1 TO 1000
     60   PROCBALL(N,500)
     70   PROCBALL(N,500)
     80   NEXT N
     90   END
You will see that this prints the ball at the point (N,500) and
then ‘unprints’ it only to print it again one step further on, and
so on.
To speed the ball up, alter line 50
     50 FOR N = 1 TO 1000 STEP 10

How to create your own ‘graphics’ characters
Each character which you type in at the keyboard has an
associated ascii code. When the computer is told to print this
character it looks up the code and prints the appropriate
character as an 8 x 8 matrix of dots. The letter A, for example,
has the code value 65 and ‘a’ has the value 97 (See page 490 for
the other codes). However, certain code values have been left
to be defined by the user. They include values 224 to 255 (See
page 384 for more details). They can be defined by use of the
VDU 23 command.
                                                       128

How to make a character (e.g. a man)
                                                       64
                                                       32
                                                       16
                                                       8
                                                       4
                                                       2
                                                       1

Create the character by planning it on             a
                                                   b
an 8 x 8 square grid.                              c
                                                   d
                                                   e
                                                   f
                                                   g
                                                   h

                               170
Note the numbers along the top of the grid which start at the
right and double for every column moved to the left. To store
the character shown above as code number 240, type in
VDU 23,240,28,28,8,127,8,20,34,65
The numbers which follow VDU 23,240 tell the computer
the pattern of dots in each horizontal row. These values are the
‘byte’ patterns corresponding to the eight cells of each row.
They can be calculated in a number of ways and entered as a
decimal or hexadecimal number. The simplest way for the
novice is to add up the values shown in the diagram above.
Thus row a consists of 16 + 8 + 4 = 28, row b is also 28, the third
row is 8, the fourth row is 64 + 32 + 16 + 8 + 4 + 2 + 1 = 127, and
so on. So to create the little man, type the following program
      5     MODE 5
     10     VDU 23,240,28,28,8,127,8,20,34,65
     20     PRINT CHR$(240);
     30     GOTO 20
Note the last two lines, which print him over and over again.

How to make him move
We have created a character which can be reproduced in any
mode (except mode 7). By printing him and then erasing him at
successive positions he can be made to move across the screen
in a similar way to the ball. However, since he exists as a
character he is treated as text, not graphics. This means that he
is made to appear by using PRINT – as above – and the
position can be defined by using the TAB statement.
Try this:
      5 MODE 4
     10 VDU 23,240,28,28,8,127,8,20,34,65
     20 PRINT TAB(20,10); CHR$(240)
The character appears at text position 20,10. This is a 40
character wide mode so 20,10 is roughly in the middle of the
screen.
Now try this:
     20 FOR X=1 TO 19
     30 PRINT TAB(X,10); CHR$(240)
     40 NEXT X

                               171
This will print the man nineteen times across the screen. Now
type these additional lines:
     40 FOR T = 1 TO 100: NEXT T
     50 PRINT TAB(X,10);" "

                                                      128
                                                      64
                                                      32
                                                      16
     60 NEXT X

                                                      8
                                                      4
                                                      2
                                                      1
                                                                  8
                                                                  8
and he appears to run                                            28
                                          make this
across the screen.                        character
                                                                 28
                                                                 62
                                          240
                                                                 62
By altering lines 30 and 50 so                                   62
that the value in brackets is                                    62
(X,X) he can be made to move                                     62
                                                                 62
diagonally on the screen.                                        62
                                                                 62
                                          this 241
Note that line 40 acts as a time delay.                          62
                                                                 62
                                                                 62
                                                                 62
                                                                 62
How to make a larger character                                   62
This time, a space ship.                                         62
                                                                127
Plan this by using several grids.         this 242
                                                                127
                                                                127
So we have                                                       93
                                                                 93
    5     MODE 4
   10     VDU 23,240,8,8,28,28,62,62,62,62
   20     VDU 23,241,62,62,62,62,62,62,
62,62
   30     VDU 23,242,62,62,62,127,127,127,
93,93
   40     X = 20: Y = 10
   50     PRINT TAB(X,Y);CHR$240;
   60     PRINT TAB(X,Y+1);CHR$241;
   70     PRINT TAB(X,Y+2);CHR$242;
This produces the space ship in the middle of the screen. To
make it take off, change the program by adding these lines
    35    X=20
    40    FOR Y = 24 TO 1 STEP -1
    80    FOR T = 1 TO 100: NEXT T
    90    PRINT TAB(X,Y); " ";
   100    PRINT TAB(X,Y+1); " ";
   110    PRINT TAB(X,Y+2);" ";
   120    NEXT Y

                               172
Now add an extra character to produce flames at the bottom of
the space ship for the initial take off.
   32 VDU 23,243,28,60,30,60,126,
108,162,162
   75 IF Y>12 THEN PRINT TAB(X,Y+3);
CHR$243
  115 PRINT TAB(X,Y+3); " ";

How to make the movement smoother
The rocket does not appear to move up the screen smoothly but
in a series of jumps. This is because when you use TAB(X,Y)
there are only 32 possible lines you can print on.
The VDU 5 statement (see also page 75, where it is used for
positioning accents, etc.) causes text to be written at the
graphics cursor. This means that you can move to any point on
the screen on the normal 1280 ´ 1024 graphic “grid” and print
text or user defined characters. To do this MOVE X,Y is used.
VDU 4 undoes the effect of a VDU 5 statement.
It causes text to be written where the text cursor is.
Then the first character can be printed using PRINT
CHR$(240); or VDU 240. These two alternatives are
equivalent but VDU 240 means less typing! We now need to
backspace one character from our original position and move
down one character cell so we can print the next character. We
can’t use TAB(X,Y) because it won’t work after a VDU 5
statement, so we use two of the four “cursor movement
commands” (see page 75).
VDU   8        backspace cursor one character
VDU   9        forward space cursor one character
VDU   10       move cursor down one line
VDU   11       move cursor up one line
Later on we’ll also use VDU 127 which has exactly the same
effect as pressing the DELETE key. All the VDU commands are
listed at the back of the book – there’s no need to remember
them all.
We need to use VDU 8 and then VDU 10, or the other way
round. You can string VDU commands together, so we can use
VDU 240,8,10

                                173
which will print the first character and then move the cursor
into position to print the next one. To print the whole rocket
and flames this is repeated 3 times: here it is done in
PROCROCKET
     5 MODE 4
     7 VDU 23;8202;0;0;0;:REM turn off
cursor
    10 VDU 23,240,8,8,28,28,62,62,62,62
    20 VDU 23,241,62,62,62,62,62,62,62,62
    30 VDU 23,242,62,62,62,127,127,127,93,93
    32 VDU 23,243,28,60,30,60,126,108,162,
162
    35 X%=20
    37 VDU 5
    38 GCOL 4,1
    40 FOR Y%=120 TO 1023 STEP 10
    50 PROCROCKET: REM draw the rocket
    60 FOR F=0 TO 200 : NEXT : REM wait a
while
    90 PROCROCKET: REM now delete it
  120 NEXT Y%
  130 END
 1010 DEF PROCROCKET
 1020 MOVE X%,Y%
 1025 VDU 240
 1030 VDU 10,8,241
 1040 VDU 10,8,242
 1050 IF Y%<500 THEN VDU 10,8,243
 1060 ENDPROC
Notice the ‘integer’ variables (followed by a % sign), are used:
these make the program run considerably faster than ‘real’
variables.
The rocket is printed at line 50 by PROCROCKET. Line 60 is a
short delay and line 90 prints the rocket again in its inverse
colour (as specified in line 38 GCOL 4,1), and so deletes it.
As an alternative to this, the rocket could be deleted by
replacing line 90 with PROCdelete, deleting line 38, and
adding the new procedure
 2000 DEF PROCdelete
 2010 MOVE X%,Y%
                               174
 2020     VDU 9,127
 2030     VDU 10,9,127
 2040     VDU 10,9,127
 2050     VDU 10,9,127
 2060     ENDPROC
This just deletes the rocket with VDU 127.
We can get smoother movement if we just delete the bottom
character every time. This removes most of the flicker and what
remains becomes almost a virtue. The price is that the detail at
the bottom of the rocket is lost, so this method only works if
your character gets wider at the bottom!
Delete lines 60 and 90, and type this new procedure:
   38     GCOL 0,1
   40     FOR Y%=120 TO 1023 STEP 4
 1010     DEF PROCROCKET
 1020     MOVE X%,Y%
 1025     VDU 240,10,8
 1030     VDU 241,10,8
 1040     VDU 242
 1050     VDU 10,8,243
 1055     VDU 127
 1060     ENDPROC
If you change one line
 1050 IF Y%<500 THEN VDU 10,8,243 ELSE
VDU 10
the flames will cut out after take-off again.

Making a complete lunar lander game
Using the procedures we have developed for creating and
moving the rocket on the screen, we can incorporate these into
a complete game which can test your skill at landing a space
ship on the Moon. This complete program uses a range of
techniques described elsewhere in the book and was written by
Jim Murray. We include a few notes to explain what is going
on.
      5 ON ERROR REPORT:GOTO 245
     10 MODE5
     20 VDU 23,240,8,8,28,28,62,62,62,62

                                175
    30    VDU 23,241,62,62,62,62,62,62,62,62
    40    VDU 23,242,62,62,62,127,127,127,93,93
    50    VDU 23,243,28,60,30,60,126,108,162,162
    60    VDU 23;8202;0;0;0;
    70    VDU 19,2,2,0,0,0
    80    VDU 28,0,20,14,0
    90    @%=&906
   110    *FX 11 1

Notes:
Line 70 enables us to use green
Line 80 sets up a text window
Line 90 sets @% – so numbers are printed as we want them
Line 110 sets the auto repeat delay period to its minimum value
Line 5 disables the effect of line 110 if you press ESCAPE,
otherwise it’s difficult to type anything again!
  120 PROClabels
  130 PROCmoon
  140 PROCinitialise
  150 VDU 5
  160 X%=960
  165 GCOL 0,3
  170 REPEAT
  180   burn$=INKEY$(0)
  185   *FX 15 1
  190   IF burn$="" THEN burnrate%=0
ELSE burnrate%=VAL(burn$)*30
  200   PROCcalculate
  210   PROCdashboard
  220   IF Y%>oldY%+4 OR Y%<oldY%-4
THEN PROCrocket
  225   PROCburn
  230   UNTIL height=0
  240 IF speed>0.004 THEN PROCcrash
ELSE PROCfanfare
  245 *FX 12, 0
  247 *FX 15, 1
  250 END

Notes: Although line 250 says END this is not the end of the
program. What follows are the various procedures which have
been called by the program as its exists so far.
                              176
Before we give the procedures, some notes on the earlier lines.
Line 120 PROClabels – sets up the titles
Line 130 PROCmoon – draws moon’s surface
Line 140 PROCinitialise – sets all the variables to initial
values
Lines 170 – 230 are the main part of program – a REPEAT
UNTIL loop
Line 180 – checks to see if any key has been pressed
Line 185 – flushes the key buffer, otherwise the burn continues
for a long time after the key is released.
Line 190 – we use INKEY$ to check if anything has been
pressed.
But this returns a string. Line 190 converts it to a number.
Line 200 PROCcalculate – does the maths
Line 210 PROCdashboard – prints up the results
Line 220 – prints the rocket if Y% (the variable used in MOVE
X%,Y%) has gone up or down by 4. In this mode the rocket is
printed in the same place unless the change is greater than 4.
Line 225 PROCburn – draws the fuel burning
Line 240 – Crash or good landing? – at less than 15 mph it’s
good.
Line 247 – flushes keyboard buffer again so you don’t get a
whole string of numbers printed when the program stops.
   700   DEF PROClabels
   710   PRINT TAB(0,7)"secs"
   720   PRINT TAB(0,9)"miles"
   725   PRINT TAB(0,10)"feet"
   730   PRINT TAB(0,12)"speed"
   740   PRINT TAB(0,14)"fuel"
   750   PRINT TAB(0,16)"burn?"
   760   ENDPROC
   800   DEF PROCmoon
   805   GCOL 0, 2
   810   LOCAL X
   820   FOR X=100 TO 1280 STEP 200
   830     MOVE X,0
   840     PLOT 85,X,30
   850     PLOT 85,X+100,0
   860     NEXT X
   870   ENDPROC

                              177
  900 DEF PROCinitialise
  910 TIME=0:now=0
  920 speed=1 :REM in miles/second
  930 height=46:REM in miles
  935 Y%=920
  937 oldY%=Y%
  940 gravity=0.001
  950 fuel=16500
  960 totalmass=33000
  965 burnrate%=0
  970 ENDPROC
 1100 DEF PROCcalculate
 1105 IF fuel<=0 THEN
fuel=0:burnrate%=0
 1110 burntime=(TIME-now)/100
 1120 now=TIME
 1130 slower=(burnrate%/totalmass)*2*
EXP(burnrate%*burntime/totalmass)
 1140 height=height-speed*burntime-
burntime*burntime/2*(gravity-slower)
 1150 speed=speed+burntime*(gravity-
slower)
 1160 burnt=burnrate%*burntime
 1170 totalmass=totalmass-burnt
 1180 fuel=fuel-burnt
 1190 IF height<0 THEN height=0
 1200 Y%=height*20+32
 1210 ENDPROC
 1300 DEF PROCdashboard
 1310 VDU4
 1320 PRINT TAB(5,7)INT(TIME/100)
 1330 PRINT TAB(5,9)INT(height)
 1340 PRINT TAB(5,10)(height*5280)
MOD 5280
 1350 PRINT TAB(5,12)INT(speed*3600)
 1360 PRINT TAB(5,14)INT(fuel)
 1370 PRINT TAB(5,16)burnrate%
 1375 VDU5
 1380 ENDPROC
 5000 DEF PROCcrash
 5020 SOUND 4,-15,100,70

                  178
 5030 FORX=1 TO 100
 5040   MOVE 850+RND(200),RND(200)
 5045   GCOL0,RND(4)
 5050   DRAW RND(1280),RND(1024)
 5055   NEXT
 5060 ENDPROC
 6000 DEF PROCfanfare
 6010 FOR X=1 TO 11
 6015   READ P,D
 6017   IF P=999 THEN L=0 ELSE L=-15
 6020   SOUND 1,L,P,D
 6025   SOUND 1,0,0,3
 6030   NEXT
 6035 DATA 97,15,97,5,101,5,999,5,101,
5,97,5,101,10,97,2,89,5,81,5,77,10
 6040 ENDPROC
 8000 DEFPROCburn
 8005 GCOL0,1
 8010 MOVEX%,oldY%
 8015 IF burnrate%=0 THEN VDU10 9,127
ELSE VDU10,243
 8025 GCOL0,3
 8030 ENDPROC
10000 DEFPROCrocket
10100 MOVEX%,oldY%
10110 VDU 10,9,127,11,9,127,11,9,127,
11,9,127
10120 MOVE X%,Y%
10140 VDU 242,8,11,241,8,11,240
10150 oldY%=Y%
10160 ENDPROC

Running the program
You start off at a height of 46 miles moving at 1 mile/sec or
3600 mph. You have fuel of 16500 lbs and your weight to start
with, including fuel, is 33000 lbs. You fire the rockets by
pressing one of the keys 1–9 and holding it down until you
want to stop burning. The rate of burning is proportional to the
number.

                              179
