# 30. Sound

30 Sound

The BBC computer contains integrated circuits specifically
designed to generate musical sounds and noises on four
‘channels’. Two statements control the generation of musical
sounds; they are SOUND and ENVELOPE. For simple effects
the statement SOUND can be used by itself but if the user
wishes to have greater control over the quality of the sounds
generated then ENVELOPE can be explored. At its simplest
the sound statement is followed by four numbers e.g.
SOUND C, A, P, D
C is the channel number                0 to 3
A is the amplitude or loudness      0 to –15
P is the pitch                      0 to 255
D is the duration                   1 to 255
The Channel Number, C, determines which of the four
“voices” is to be used. Channel 0 produces ‘noise’ (this channel
will be explained in detail later) whereas channels 1, 2 and 3
produce purer notes.
The amplitude, A can be varied between 0 (off) and –15 (loud).
The pitch, P selects notes in quarter semi-tone intervals.
Middle C is produced when P is set at 53 and other notes are
generated with the values of P given opposite.
As you can see the computer can produce notes spanning five
full octaves. The values of P are also shown opposite for a stave
in the key of C but one octave up.
The duration, D determines the length of the note and is given
in twentieths of a second. Those used to reading music will
find that music marked “Moderato h = 60” will sound about
right with the following settings for D.

                              180
e5                 q 10 h 20 w 40
                              Octave number
Note 0       1           2           3       4        5         6
B    1       49          97         145     193      241
A#           45          93         141     189      237
A            41          89         137     185      233
G#           37          85         133     181      229
G            33          81         129     177      225
F#           29          77         125     173      221
F            25          73         121     169      217
E            21          69         117     165      213
D#           17          65         113     161      209
D            13          61         109     157      205      253
C#            9          57         105     153      201      249
C             5          53         101     149      197      245

           G            177
             F    169
           E            165
             D    157
           C            149
             B    145
           A            137
             G    129
           F            121
             E    117
           D            109
             C    101
           B             97
             A     89
           G             81
             F     73
           E             69
             D     61
           C             53
             B     49
           A             41
             G     33
           F             25

That completes the simple description of the SOUND
command.
There are two main areas where the SOUND command can be
extended. First instead of working with a fixed sound quality
one can select an “envelope” to vary both the amplitude and
the pitch of the note while it is playing; secondly it is possible
to ensure that notes are synchronised so that chords start
together. In addition to these major extensions there are a
number of other things that can be controlled, and these will be
described later.

                                   181
If you wish to use an envelope to vary either the amplitude or
the pitch of a note (or both) then you must first define the
envelope and secondly, instead of using a fixed amplitude in
the SOUND statement, you must quote the envelope number
for A. Four envelopes are normally permitted and they are
numbered 1 to 4.
Thus
SOUND 1,2,53,20
would produce on channel 1 a note of middle C with a duration
of one second and the amplitude and pitch would be controlled
by the envelope number 2.
The statement ENVELOPE is followed by 14 numbers and the
following labels will be used for the 14 parameters.
ENVELOPE N, T, PI1, PI2, PI3, PN1, PN2,
PN3, AA, AD, AS, AR, ALA, ALD
A brief description of each parameter follows
Parameter        Range Function
N                  1 to 4 Envelope number
T bits 0-6      1 to 127 length of each step in hundredth of a
                          second
bit 7              0 or 1 0 = auto repeat pitch envelope,
                          1 = don’t repeat pitch envelope
PI1          –128 to 127 change of pitch per step in section 1
PI2          –128 to 127 change of pitch per step in section 2
PI3          –128 to 127 change of pitch per step in section 3
PN1             0 to 255 Number of steps in section l
PN2             0 to 255 Number of steps in section 2
PN3             0 to 255 Number of steps in section 3

AA           –127 to 127 Change of amplitude per step during
                         attack phase
AD           –127 to 127 Change of amplitude per step during
                         decay phase
AS             –127 to 0 Change of amplitude per step during
                         sustain phase
AR             –127 to 0 Change of amplitude per step during
                         release phase
ALA             0 to 126 Target level at end of attack phase
ALD             0 to 126 Target level at end of decay phase

                              182
Note that the pitch can take on a value between 0 and 255. If
the pitch is greater than 255 (e.g, 257) then 256 will be
repeatedly subtracted from it until it is in range.
The amplitude has a range of 0 to 127 in the ENVELOPE
statement whereas it had a range of 0 to –15 in the SOUND
statement. The amplitude cannot be set outside the range 0 to
127.
Note also that the total duration of the attack, decay and
sustain periods (but not the release period) is determined by
the SOUND statement and not the ENVELOPE statement.
The ENVELOPE is divided up into a number of steps – usually
of a hundredth of a second each and both the pitch and
amplitude can be changed at the end of each step.

The pitch envelope
The pitch of the note can be changed in three sections. For each
section you can specify the change in pitch at each tick of the
clock (step) in the section. Suppose we wish to generate a
wailing sound like a police siren. The pitch has to rise and fall
like this
pitch
        225
                                 section 2

        100

                  section                          section
                     1                                3
          0
              0             10      20        30             40 time in steps

During section 1 the pitch changes +2 units per step and
section 1 contains 10 steps. In section 2 the pitch changes –2
units per step and there are 20 steps. Section 3 contains 10 steps
of +2 units. So thus far the envelope command looks like
ENVELOPE 2,1,2,-2,2,10,20,10
The next six numbers control the amplitude of the sound and
might well be 1, 0, 0, –1, 100, 100 (these will be explained in a
moment).

                                             183
So the total program to show the pitch envelope working
would be
   10 ENVELOPE 2,1,2,-2,2,10,20,
10,1,0,0,-1,100,100
   20 SOUND 1,2,100,100
Here is another pitch envelope – it plays 3 notes in succession.
   10 ENVELOPE 3,25,16,12,8,1,1,1,
10,-10,0,-10,100,50
It reads:
Envelope number 3.
Each step is 25/100 i.e. 1/4 second long.
The first section of the pitch envelope uses a pitch change of 16
units.
The second section uses a pitch change of 12 units.
The third section has a pitch change of 8 units.
All three sections have only 1 step in each section.
Now to explain the amplitude envelope.

The amplitude envelope
Suppose that we wish to imitate a car driving towards us
getting louder all the time and then driving past before
stopping nearby and then driving away. The amplitude of the
sound against time might well look like this

                car               going       stopped       going
                approaching       away                      away
amplitude
     100

      60

        0
            0       2         4           6             8           10 time in seconds

The first phase of the amplitude envelope, where the sound is
getting louder is called the “Attack phase”.

                                                   184
amplitude
     ALA
                         decay
                                     sustain
     ALD
                attack
                                                   release

            0       2    4       6             8         10 time in seconds

The amplitude envelope is specified by giving six parameters.
The first (AA) gives the change of amplitude at the end of each
step during the attack phase and it must be a positive number.
Usually the envelope starts with an amplitude of zero.
However it is possible to start with a non-zero amplitude if you
have just interrupted a note on the same channel. The attack
phase continues until the amplitude reaches the level given by
the parameter ALA.
For reference the six parameters are defined again here.
Parameter     Range Function
AA      -127 to 127 Change of amplitude per step during
                    attack phase
AD      -127 to 127 Change of amplitude per step during
                    decay phase
AS      -127 to 0   Change of amplitude per step during
                    sustain phase
AR      -127 to 0   Change of amplitude per step during
                    release phase
ALA        0 to 126 Target level at end of attack phase
ALD        0 to 126 Target level at end of decay phase
In our example the attack phase takes 4 seconds and each step
lasts 1/4 second so there will be 16 steps. We want these 16
steps to get us from an amplitude of zero to an amplitude of at
least 100 – if we make each step increase the amplitude by 7 we
will get there in 16 steps. So parameter AA = 7.
During the decay phase the amplitude must drop from 100 to
60 in 2 seconds. During 2 seconds there are 8 steps. So the
amplitude drops 40 units (100-60) in 8 steps – so each step must
reduce the amplitude by 5 units. Thus AD = -5. So far we have
determined the following parameters of the amplitude
envelope.

                                          185
AA = 7
AD = -5
ALA = 100
ALD = 50
In our case the amplitude does not change during the sustain
period so we can set AS = 0. The sound will go on until the
sustain phase is ended. The total time allowed for the attack,
decay and sustain phases is given by the duration part of the
SOUND command. The release phase then starts.
Note that the length of the attack and decay phases is set by the
values chosen for AA, AD, ALA and ALD but that the sustain
phase can be terminated either by the amplitude reaching zero
or the time set by the duration of the SOUND statement
running out. The duration has to be set with care to ensure that
it doesn’t cut the note off at the wrong moment.
At the end of the sustain period the note enters the release
phase where the note changes in amplitude at the rate set by
AR until it reaches zero.
As you may have guessed there are numerous ways of getting
things wrong so that a phase does not complete as expected.
For example with ALA set to 100 and ALD set to 50 and a
decay rate (AD) of zero the amplitude will not decay at all
during the decay phase. However the sound will be moved to
the release phase when the duration is reached.
The envelope statement is very complicated and there is a wide
range of possible effects. You will have to use it quite a lot
before you can accurately predict what effect you will produce.

Some sample ‘envelopes’ to try out

ENVELOPE 1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,2,0,-10,
-5,120,0
ENVELOPE 2,3,0,0,0,0,0,0,121,-10,-5,
-2,120,120
ENVELOPE 3,7,2,1,1,1,1,1,121,-10,-5,
-2,120,120
ENVELOPE 4,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,61,0,-10,
-120,120,0
ENVELOPE 1,8,1,-1,1,1,1,1,121,-10,-5,
-2,120,120

                              186
Note synchronization and other effects
The first parameter of the SOUND statement has been
considered, up to now, to control only the channel number. It
can in fact control a number of other features. For this purpose
the channel number should be considered as a four digit
hexadecimal number
C=&HSFN
Parameter Range       Function
N         0 to 3      Channel number itself
F         0 or 1      Flush control
S         0 to 3      Synchronization control
H         0 or 1      Continuation control
N selects the channel number.
F If F is zero the sound will be placed in the channel queue if a
note is playing on that channel. If F = 1 then the channel queue
will be flushed (emptied) so that the sound can be generated
immediately.
S It is possible to synchronize two or more channels so that
they do not start until all have received a note marked for
synchronous production. The value of S determines how many
other channels are to form the chord. Thus for a three note
chord all three channels should be fed a note with S set to 2.
H This parameter allows the previous event on the channel to
continue if it is set to 1. In this case the amplitude and pitch
parameters of the new sound command have no effect.
Because the “dummy” note thus created is added to the
queue in the normal way it can be used to ensure that the
release phase of a sound is continued. Normally the release
phase is truncated by the next note on the queue. If H = 0 then
the note is treated as a “real” note in the usual way.
Typical values of C are
C=&201 a note on channel 1 to be synchronized with 2
       others.
C=&12 a note on channel 2 is to be played immediately
      regardless of what was in the channel 2 queue
A more succinct description of SOUND and ENVELOPE are
given in the keyword section on pages 347 and 244.

                               187
