# 31. File handling

31 File handling

You are probably already aware that as well as storing
computer programs on cassette or disc, you can store “data”.
By “data” we mean sets of numbers or words. We might, for
example, store a set of names and telephone numbers. This set
of data is called a file. A set of basic statements are provided to
enable you to read information from files, to write information
to a new file, to update an existing file, to delete a file, to find
out how big a file is, to move to a certain record in a file, to
check if you have reached the end of a file and to obtain a
catalogue of all the files that exist. There are also several other
statements for performing other actions on the files.
One of the major features of the BBC Computer system is that
exactly the same statements are used no matter which ‘filing
system’ is in use. A number of different filing systems are
available including cassette, disc and network systems.
Programs written to work on a cassette file system will usually
work unmodified on a disc system. See page 400 for details of
other file systems.
Firstly here is a summary of all the file handling statements
available in BBC basic.
*CAT        Gives a catalogue of all data files and programs on
            the cassette or floppy disc. It takes a very long time
            on a cassette.
OPENIN Opens a file so that it can be read.
OPENOUT Opens a new (empty) file for writing.
INPUT# Reads data from a file into the computer.
PRINT# Writes data from the computer into a file.
BGET#       Reads a single character (byte) from a file.
BPUT#       Writes a single character (byte) to a file.
PTR#        Can be used either to find out which record we are
                                188
            about to read (or write) or to move to a specific
            record. (Not cassette)
EXT#        Indicates how long a file is. (Not cassette)
EOF#        Indicates whether or not the end of a file has been
            reached.
CLOSE# Indicates to the computer that you have finished
       with a file.
The statement *CAT can be used at any time. However before
you can use any of the other file statements you have to open
the file. After you have opened a file you can read and write to
it as much as you wish. When you have finished with the file
you must close it.
An analogy may help to make one or two points clearer. The
files are all kept in one room and your only method of
communicating with them is via 5 telephone lines to 5 clerks. In
addition there is a supervisor who knows which telephone line
to use to communicate with the right clerk. It is the clerk’s job
to keep all the files tidy and you really have no idea how he
looks after the files – nor does it matter, so long as he is
efficient.
To return to our computer, suppose that we wish to create a file
called "DRINKS" in which we list every drink we ever try.
First of all we have to ask the supervisor to allocate a phone
line and clerk to us. The statement.
X = OPENOUT "DRINKS"
will place the number of the channel (telephone line) allocated
to the file into the variable X. Next we can ask the user for the
names of the drinks using
INPUT "WHAT IS THE DRINK CALLED", D$
and then send the name (held in D$) to the clerk to be entered
in the file. Notice how we have to use the variable X to ensure
that it is entered in the correct file.
PRINT#X,D$
and then we could repeat this process until the user replied
with the word STOP. The program would look like this

                               189
   10 X=OPENOUT "DRINKS"
   20 REPEAT
   30   INPUT "What is the drink
called", D$
   40   PRINT#X, D$
   50   UNTIL D$="STOP"
   60 CLOSE#X
When run the program will save the data on cassette (if one is
connected).
>RUN
RECORD then RETURN
What is the drink called?WHISKY
What is the drink called?PORT
What is the drink called?GIN
What is the drink called?BEER
What is the drink called?LAGER
What is the drink called?CIDER
What is the drink called?TOMATO JUICE
What is the drink called?STOP
That has created a file called "DRINKS" which has been
stored on cassette or disc. The program to read the file back in
is also quite straightforward.
     10 Y=OPENIN "DRINKS"
     20 REPEAT
     30   INPUT#Y, R$
     40   PRINT R$
     50   UNTIL R$="STOP"
     60 CLOSE#Y
When this is run, if the tape is now played from a point just
before the position where the data was recorded, the list will
then appear on the screen.
>RUN
WHISKY
PORT
GIN
BEER
LAGER
CIDER
TOMATO JUICE
STOP

                               190
When using these programs on cassette you must be careful to
position the tape (by “forward” and “rewind”) so that the tape
is in the right place. In the first program, where you record the
data onto the tape you will have to find a piece of blank
tape – preferably with the tape recorder counter set to 100 or
200 or 300 or some other round number. After you have
finished the first program you have to rewind the tape to the
start of the data file which was at, say, 200. It is just like trying
to play a piece of music back that you have recorded on a
cassette; you must rewind the cassette to the start of the piece.
You may well know how difficult it is to find a particular
record on a cassette and that is why it is so important to use the
tape counter every time and to write down where each title is
on the tape. Your index might look like
   100 NAMES
   200 DRINKS
   300 SLIDES
   400
For most applications that is all you will need to know about
file handling and you will only use statements like these
*CAT
X=OPENIN "FILENAME"
X=OPENOUT "FILENAME"
PRINT#X,A,B$
INPUT#X,A,B$
CLOSE#X
"FILENAME" is the name of the file which normally consists
of up to ten letters but see page 397 for more details.
A and B$ represent any (and as many) numeric and string
variables as you wish to record.
X is a numeric variable used to remember the channel number
allocated to the file number.
For more specialist applications a number of other functions
and statements are provided. BGET# and BPUT# enable
single characters to be input and output. They would be used
for recording special data, for example from laboratory
experiments.
EXT# and PTR# are mainly used with disc systems where

                                191
random access files are required. They cannot be used in a
cassette environment.
EOF# enables a program to detect the end of the file when
reading in data. It is normally used in the following way
     10   Y=OPENIN "DRINKS"
     20   REPEAT
     30   INPUT#Y, A$
     40   PRINT A$
     50   UNTIL EOF#Y
     60   CLOSE#Y

Telephone book program
One of the programs on the welcome cassette can be used to
keep a personal telephone directory. Clearly it should be
possible to save a copy of all your entries on to cassette and to
load them back into the computer later. Several modifications
must be made to the program to enable this to happen. These
modifications are shown below. Once you have modified the
program you can then save the corrected version with a new
name, for example
SAVE "TELE2"
First, load the program. Don’t RUN it, but type CTRL N then
LIST to list the program in ‘page mode’. To move down the
program, press SHIFT. When you come to a page requiring
one of the changes set out below, press ESCAPE and edit the
line in the normal way.
Lines 210 to 280 omit final '
Add new lines:
  282 PRINT"             9 - Load data from
cassette"
  284 PRINT"             0 - Save data to
cassette"
Change line 290 to
   290 SEL = -1
In line 300 change TAB(3,22) to TAB(3,23)
Line 330 change to
   330 IF A<0 OR A>9 THEN 310

                                192
Change line 350 to
  350 IF SEL> -1 THEN PRINT TAB(2,SEL+3
-10*(SEL=0));CHR$(&89);
Change line 360 to
  360 PRINT TAB(2,A+3-10*(A=0));
CHR$(&88);A;CHR$(&89)
Change line 380 to
   380 IF SEL=-1 THEN 300
Change line 500 to
  500 ON SEL+1 GOTO 505,510,520,530,
540,550,560,570,580,590
New lines:
   505 PROCSAVE:GOTO 200
   590 PROCLOAD:GOTO 200
10000    DEF PROCLOAD
10005    PRINT TAB(0,16); "Play tape and
press    any key"
10007    Q=GET
10008    PRINT "Please wait"
10010    E%=OPENIN "DATA"
10020    INPUT#E%,X
10030    FOR I%=1 TO X
10032    INPUT#E%,NAME$(I%),PHONE$(I%)
10034    PROCPACK(I%)
10036    NEXT
10040    CLOSE#E%
10050    ENDPROC
11000    DEF PROCSAVE
11005    PRINT TAB(0,16); "Please press ";
11010    E%=OPENOUT "DATA"
11015    PRINT '"Please wait"
11020    PRINT#E%,X
11030    FOR I%=1 TO X
11032    PRINT#E%,NAME$(I%),PHONE$(I%)
11036    NEXT
11040    CLOSE#E%
11050    ENDPROC

                     193
