# 32. Speeding up programs

32 Speeding up
   programs and
   saving memory
   space

For some applications it is important that a program runs as
quickly as possible and a few tips are given here which will,
together, substantially increase the execution speed of
programs. In other applications space may be at a premium
and other suggestions are given for saving space. Sometimes
there is a trade off between the size of a program and speed
and the user will have to decide which is more important.
The most dramatic saving that can be made is in the speed of
execution of programs. The use of integer variables (e.g.
WEIGHT%), and especially of the resident integer variables
A% to Z% will result in execution times as little as 50% of those
achieved with “real” variables. Again, integer division (DIV)
is much faster than normal division when working with
integers. Using integer arrays rather than real arrays will save
20% of the memory required.
Execution speed can also be increased in the following ways.
1 Allocate variable names with an even spread throughout
the alphabet – so don’t start all your variables with “F”, for
example.
2 Omit the control variable after the word NEXT. i.e., say
NEXT rather than NEXT X. This saves quite a lot of time.
3 REPEAT...UNTIL loops are much faster than
IF...THEN GOTO loops.

                               194
4 Procedures are faster than GOSUBs, and it is faster to pass
parameters to a procedure than to use global variables. i.e, do
use PROCBOX(X,Y,Z) rather than PROCBOX.
5 If you have a line which contains a lot of “integer”
arithmetic and a little “real” arithmetic then, if possible, place
the integer work at the start of the line where it will be
executed first.
6 Have as few line numbers as possible – i.e. use long lines
and spread the line numbers out rather than re-numbering
with an interval of 1. An interval of 10 is good.
As far as space saving is concerned the following can be tried –
but all reduce the readability of programs and should not be
used unless it is really necessary.
7 Omit spaces wherever possible – but you must keep a space
or a % or $ sign or some other separator before most keywords
to avoid ambiguity. If a variable FRED is in use then you must
write
Y=FRED OR MARY
and not
Y=FREDORMARY
In the latter case the computer will look for the variable
FREDORMARY rather than the two variables FRED and
MARY. The space after OR is not required.
8 Omit REM statements.

                                195
Reference section

          196
