# 33. BASIC keywords

33 BASIC keywords

This chapter contains a detailed description of every word that
basic understands. These words are called “keywords”.
Some parts of the description are intended for the novice user,
and others for the person who is familiar with basic. Each
keyword is described under a number of headings as follows:

KEYWORD
Sometimes followed by a few words explaining the derivation
of the word.

Purpose
A plain-English description of what the keyword does. This is
intended for the person who is learning basic.
The only technical terms used are “string” and “numeric” – if
you don’t understand those two words then read section 9 on
page 62 first. The mathematical functions sin, cos, tan, etc are
not explained for the absolute beginner – there just isn’t
enough room to explain everything!

Examples
This section gives a few one-line examples of the use of the
keyword (not complete programs). Some of the examples have
a number at the start of the line. This number is an “example
line-number”.
The examples are only intended to be illustrative. In some cases
a line of basic program may overflow onto the next line as
elsewhere in this book.

                              197
Description
In this section the keyword is described using normal
computer jargon.
Known problems
Any known bugs are described here.
Syntax
The syntax of each keyword’s usage is given more by way of
helpful explanation than for its rigorous accuracy. Purists will,
rightly, complain at this travesty of Backus-Naur Form (BNF).
Others may find the entries useful.
The following symbols are used as part of the syntax
explanation:
{} denotes possible repetition of the enclosed symbols zero or
more times
[] enclose optional items
| indicates alternatives from which one should be chosen
<num-const> means a numeric constant such as “4.5” or
“127”

<num-var> means numeric variable such as “X” or “length”

<numeric> means either a <num-const> or a
<num-var>, or a combination of these in an expression for
example “4*X+6”

<string-const> means a string enclosed in quotation
marks, e.g. "GAVIN MOUNT"

<string-var> means a string variable such as A$ or
NAME$

<string> means either a <string-const> or a
<string-var>, or an expression such as A$+"WOMBAT"

<testable condition> means something which is
either true or false. Since true and false have values it is
possible to use a <numeric> at any point where a
<testable condition> is required. The distinction
between these two is, in fact, rather unnecessary.

                               198
<statement> means any basic statement, for example,
PRINT or GOSUB or PROC

<variable name> means any sequence of letters or
numbers that obeys the rules for variables (see pages 24, 62 and
120).

Associated keywords
This section is intended to draw your attention to other
keywords which either have similar functions or which are
normally used in conjunction with this keyword. You will
probably find it helpful to read the pages which describe the
associated keywords.

Demonstration program
If appropriate a short program is included to illustrate the use
of the keyword.

                               199
ABS absolute value
Purpose
This function turns negative numbers into equivalent positive
numbers but leaves positive numbers alone. For example the
absolute value of –9.75 is 9.75 while the absolute value of 4.56
is 4.56.
The ABS function is often used when calculating the difference
between two values if you do not know which is the larger of
the two. Thus (K–L) will be positive if K is greater than L, and
will be negative if L is greater than K.
For example if K=9 and L=12 then (K–L) would be equal to –3.
However the value of ABS(K-L) will always be positive. In
the example given ABS(K-L) would equal 3.

Examples
   205 error=ABS(DIFFERENCE)
   100 DIFF=ABS(X2-X1)
PRINT ABS(temp%-50)

Description
A function giving the absolute value of its argument.

Known problems
There is a known ‘bug’ in release 1.0. If ABS is used with the
unary minus operator (PRINT -ABS(1)) a ‘Type
mismatch’ error message will be reported.

Syntax
<num-var> = ABS(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
SGN

                               200
ACS arc-cosine
Purpose
To calculate an angle whose cosine is known. The calculated
angle is in radians but may be converted to degrees by using
the function DEG. See DEG for more information.

Examples
   10 X=ACS(Y)
1205 angle=DEG(ACS(0.5678))
   330 OUT=ACS(.234)
PRINT ACS(0.5)

Description
A function giving the arc-cosine of its argument. The result is
in radian measure.

Syntax
<num-var> = ACS(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
ASN, ATN, SIN, COS, TAN, RAD, DEG

                               201
                          analogue to digital
ADVAL                     converter value

Purpose
An analogue signal is one which can have almost any value –
including fractional parts. It is contrasted with a digital signal
which is expressed in exact numbers. The height of the water in
a harbour is an analogue quantity whereas the number of boats
it contains is a digital quantity.
Watches always used to have analogue dials – “The time is
about four fifteen”. Electronic things usually much prefer to
work with whole numbers; for example
16h : 15m : 23s
There are four “Analogue to Digital” converters in the Model B
BBC Microcomputer. Each analogue to digital converter in the
computer accepts a voltage and gives out a whole number
indicating how large the voltage is. This voltage might be
controlled by, for example, the position of a “games paddle” or
“joy-stick” control which is connected to the computer.
Alternatively the computer might be connected to a speed
sensor on a piece of machinery or it might measure the
temperature of a room.
The input voltage range is 0 volt to 1.8 volt. When the input is
0V the converter produces the number zero. With 1.8 V input
the converter produces the number 65520. Why 65520? The
circuit in the computer which does the conversion was
designed to give out numbers in the range 0 to 4095. However
it may well be that future converters can give out numbers over
a large range – enabling the computer to measure things more
accurately. In order to ensure that the BBC Microcomputer can
cope with this situation we have specified a large range.
Thus instead of numbers in the range 0 to 4095 it produces a
number in the range 0 to 65520. Therefore instead of numeric
results going up in the sequence 0,1,2,3, etc. they will go
0,16,32,48,64 etc. If you prefer the range 0 to 4095 then just
divide the value by 16.

                               202
There are four analogue input channels provided in the Model
B microcomputer and the number in brackets after the
keyword ADVAL refers to the channel whose value you wish
to find. The channels are numbered 1,2,3,4.
ADVAL(0) performs a special function in that it can be used
to test which of the “Fire” buttons is pressed on the games
paddles. The value returned also indicates which ADC channel
was the last one to be updated. The following can be used to
extract these two pieces of information from the value returned
by ADVAL(0).
X=ADVAL(0) AND 3
will give a number with the following meaning
X=0   no button pressed
X=1   left side fire button pressed
X=2   right side fire button pressed
X=3   both fire buttons pressed.
X=ADVAL(0) DIV 256
will give the number of the last analogue to digital channel to
complete conversion. If the value returned is zero then no
channel has yet completed conversion.
ADVAL with a negative number in the brackets – e.g.
X=ADVAL(-3), can be used to see how full any of the
internal buffers are. When characters are typed in on the
keyboard they are put into a buffer from which they are
extracted with statements like INPUT and GET. Other buffers
are used internally for other purposes. The exact meaning of
the number returned depends on the buffer being tested.
X=ADVAL(-1)           returns the number of characters in the
                      keyboard buffer
X=ADVAL(-2)           returns the number of characters in the
                      RS423 input buffer
X=ADVAL(-3)           returns the number of free spaces in the
                      RS423 output buffer
X=ADVAL(-4)           returns the number of free spaces in the
                      printer output buffer

                              203
X=ADVAL(-5)            returns the number of free spaces in the
                       SOUND channel 0 buffer
X=ADVAL(-6)            returns the number of free spaces in the
                       SOUND channel 1 buffer
X=ADVAL(-7)            returns the number of free spaces in the
                       SOUND channel 2 buffer
X=ADVAL(-8)            returns the number of free spaces in the
                       SOUND channel 3 buffer
X=ADVAL(-9)            returns the number of free spaces in the
                       SPEECH buffer
This feature can be used, for example, to ensure that a program
never gets stuck waiting for a SOUND channel to empty.
e.g.
IF ADVAL(-7)<>0 THEN SOUND 2, .....etc

Examples
   980 X=ADVAL(3)
   125 TEMP=ADVAL(X)
intensity=ADVAL(1)

Syntax
<num-var> = ADVAL(<numeric>)

Description
A function which returns the last known value of the analogue
to digital channel given in its argument. There are 4 channels
each of 12 bit resolution, but the returned value is scaled to 16
bits.
The analogue to digital converter cycles repeatedly through the
selected channels and keeps a table of the results so that the
function ADVAL returns very quickly. New samples are taken
about every 10 milli-seconds. Thus with 4 channels selected
results will be updated every 40 ms. See page 426 “Machine
Operating System” for information on changing the number of
channels selected.

                               204
AND
Purpose
AND can be used either as a logical operator or as a “bit by bit”
operator. A common jargon word for “bit by bit” is “bitwise”
and it will be used in the description which follows.
As a logical operator AND is used to ensure that two conditions
are met before something is done. For example
IF X=9 AND Y=0 THEN PRINT "HELLO"
Logical AND is most often used as part of the
IF...AND...THEN... construction.
Bitwise AND compares the first bit of one number with the first
bit of another number. If both bits are set to a one (rather than a
zero) then the first bit in the answer is also set to a one. This
process is then repeated for bit 1 in each of the two numbers
being compared and so on for all 32 bits in the numbers. For
example the result of 14 AND 7 is 6, since in binary

14   0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 1110
 7   0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0111
 6   0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0110

Examples
  300 IF length>9 AND wt>9 THEN PRINT
"YES"
  100 IF X=2 AND cost>5 AND J=12 THEN
PRINT "NO!!"
The above example will only print NO!! if all three conditions
are met.

Description
The operation of integer bitwise AND between two items. Note
that the logical and bitwise operations are in fact equivalent.
This follows since the value of TRUE is –1 which is represented
on this machine by the binary number
                               205
1111 1111 1111 1111 1111 1111 1111 1111
Similarly the binary value of FALSE is
0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000
Thus PRINT 6=6
would print “–1” since “6=6” is TRUE.

Syntax
<num-var> = <numeric> AND <numeric>
<testable condition> = <testable
condition> AND <testable condition>

Associated keywords
EOR, OR, FALSE, TRUE, NOT

                             206
ASC American Standard Code (ASCII)
Purpose
There are two commonly used methods of talking about
characters (things like A, B, 5, ?, and so on). Most obviously
they are single characters! So we can say D$ = "H" – meaning
put the letter H into the box in the computer labelled D$. The
computer understands this but it doesn’t actually put an H into
the box. Instead it stores a number which represents the letter
H (in fact the number is 72). Every character has a unique
corresponding number called its ascii code. (ascii stands for
American Standard Code for Information Interchange. The
abbreviation ascii rhymes with “Laski”).
Sometimes it is convenient to find out what number
corresponds to a particular character – that is its ascii code.
You can look it up at the back of this book or you can say to the
computer
PRINT ASC("H")
The function ASC gives the ascii value of the first letter in the
string. Thus
PRINT ASC("Good")
gives 71, the ascii value of “G”.
The reverse process of generating a 1-character string from a
given ascii value is performed by the function CHR$.

Examples
     25 X=ASC("Today")
would put the ascii value of “T” which is 84 into the variable X.
   650 value5=ASC(A$)

Description
A function returning the ascii character value of the first
character of the argument string. If the string is null (empty)
then –1 will be returned.

                               207
Syntax
<num-var> = ASC(<string>)

Associated keywords
CHR$, STR$, VAL

                      208
ASN arc-sine
Purpose
To calculate an angle whose sine is known. The calculated
angle is in radians but may be converted to degrees by using
the function DEG. 1 radian is equal to about 57 degrees.
Mathematicians often prefer to work in radians.

Examples
   340 J=ASN(0.3456)
     30 angle=DEG(ASN(.7654))
PRINT ASN(.5)

Description
A function giving the arc-sine of its argument. The result is in
radian measure.

Syntax
<num-var> = ASN(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
ACS, ATN, SIN, COS, TAN, RAD, DEG

                               209
ATN arc-tangent
Purpose
To calculate an angle whose tangent is known. The calculated
angle is in radians but may be converted to degrees by using
the function DEG.

Examples
 1250 X=ATN(Y)
   240 value=DEG(ATN(2.31))

Description
A function giving the arc-tangent of its argument. The result is
in radian measure.

Syntax
<num-var> = ATN(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
ACS, ASN, SIN, COS, TAN, RAD, DEG

                              210
AUTO automatic
Purpose
When typing a basic program into the computer it is common
to make the first line of the program line number 10, the second
line 20 etc. To save having to type in the line number each time,
the command AUTO can be used to make the computer “offer”
each line number automatically. Used on its own the command
AUTO will offer first line 10 and then line 20, 30, 40 etc. The
command AUTO 455 would instead start the process at line
number 455, followed by lines 465, 475, 485 etc.
Another option allows the user to select the step size. Thus the
command AUTO 465,2 would cause the computer to offer
lines 465, 467, 469, 471 etc. The largest step size is 255.
To escape from AUTO mode the user must press the key
marked ESCAPE. AUTO mode will be abandoned if the
computer tries to generate a line number greater than 32767.

Examples
AUTO
AUTO 220
AUTO 105,5

Syntax
AUTO [<num-const>[,<num-const>]]

Description
AUTO is a command allowing the user to enter lines without
first typing in the number of the line. Because AUTO is a
command it cannot form part of a multiple statement line.
AUTO mode can be left by pressing ESCAPE or by generating
a line number exceeding 32767.
AUTO may have up to two arguments. The first optional
argument gives the starting line number and the second
optional argument gives the increment between line numbers.

                              211
BGET# get a byte from file
Purpose
Numbers and words can be recorded on cassette tape and on
floppy discs. The function BGET# enables a single character or
number to be read back into the computer from the cassette,
disc or network. Before using this statement a file must have
been opened using the OPENIN function or else an error will
occur (see page 188 for more information about “files”). When
a file is opened, using OPENIN, the computer will allocate the
file a channel number. This number must be used in all
subsequent operations on the file, for example when reading
the file or when writing a new file. Again see the chapter on file
handling, page 188, for more information.

Examples
 6000 character=BGET#(channel)
   340 next_letter%=BGET#C

Description
A function which gets a byte from the file whose channel
number is the argument. The file must have been opened
before this statement is executed.

Syntax
<num-var> = BGET#<num-var>

Associated keywords
OPENIN, OPENOUT, OPENUP, CLOSE#, EXT#,
PTR#, PRINT#, INPUT#, BPUT#, EOF#

                               212
BPUT# put a byte to file
Purpose
To store a byte on the cassette or disc. See page 188 for a more
detailed description of file handling. The number which is sent
to the file can have any value between 0 and 255. If you attempt
to store a number that is greater then 255 then 256 will be
repeatedly subtracted from the number until it is less than 256.
The final number will then be sent to file. (This statement is
used to store single bytes – not large numbers. Large numbers
can be stored using PRINT#.) As with BGET# the file must
be “open” before this statement can be used.

Examples
    30 BPUT# channel,number
   700 BPUT#N,32
   450 BPUT# STAFF_FILE,A/256

Description
A statement which puts a byte to the file whose channel
number is the first argument. The second argument’s least
significant byte is sent. The file must be open before this
statement is executed.

Syntax
BPUT#<num-var>, <numeric>

Associated keywords
OPENIN, OPENOUT, OPENUP, CLOSE#, EXT#,
PTR#, PRINT#, INPUT#, BGET#, EOF#

                              213
                    transfer control to a
CALL                machine code subroutine

Purpose
This statement makes the computer execute a piece of machine
code which the user has previously placed in the computer’s
memory. Before using this powerful statement you should
have a good understanding of machine code and assembly
language as incorrect use can destroy a program completely!
Unfortunately there is not enough room in this book to teach
assembly language programming but brief guidance for those
familiar with 6502 assembly language is given in section 43.

Examples
     50 rotate=&0270
     60 CALL rotate,J,K,L
   200 CALL 1234,A$,M,J$

Description
A statement to call a piece of machine code. The number of
parameters passed is variable and may be zero. The parameters
are variable parameters and may be changed on execution of
the subroutine. The addresses of parameters are passed in a
Parameter Block starting at location 0600 hex.
On entry to the subroutine the processor’s A, X, Y registers are
initialised to the least significant bytes of the integer variables
A%, X% and Y%. The carry flag is set to the least significant bit
of the C% variable.
On entry a Parameter Block is set up by the computer and it
contains the following list:
Number of parameters - 1 byte
parameter address    - 2 bytes
parameter type       - 1 byte
parameter address    - repeated as often
parameter type      }{ as necessary.

                                214
Parameter types:
0     - 8 bit byte (e.g. ?X)
4     - 32 bit integer variable (e.g. !X or X%)
5     - 40 bit floating point number (e.g. V)
128   - A string at a defined address (e.g. $X – terminated by
        a &0D)
129   - A string variable such as A$
In the case of a string variable the parameter address is the
address of a String Information Block which gives the start
address, number of bytes allocated and current length of the
string in that order.

Syntax
CALL <numeric>{,<num-var>|<string-var>}

Associated keywords
USR

                              215
CHAIN
Purpose
CHAIN enables a program to be split up into a number of
small sections.
The CHAIN statement is used to enable one program to LOAD
and RUN another program automatically. For example, one
program might enable the user to enter the number of hours
worked by employees and that program might CHAIN a
second program which would print out the payslips. In turn
that might then CHAIN a third program which would do a
coin analysis on the data held on the file.
CHAIN is also useful in a game with a lot of instructions. The
instructions could all be stored as one file which could then
CHAIN the main game – thus releasing a lot of the computer’s
memory.
CHAIN"" will chain the next program (on a tape). This will
not work with other file systems where you must give the file
name. For that reason it must not be used in programs which
may be used on disc systems.

Examples
   900 CHAIN "GAME_1"
 1234 CHAIN "NEWPROG"
CHAIN A$

Description
A statement which will load and run the program whose name
is specified in the argument. All variables except @% and A%
to Z% are cleared.

Syntax
CHAIN <string>

Associated keywords
LOAD, SAVE
                             216
CHR$ character string
Purpose
To generate a character (single letter or number etc.) from the
number given. The character generated will be the ascii
character at the position given in the ascii table. See the
description of ASC and the full ascii table on page 486.
The statement VDU has a similar effect to PRINT CHR$ and
may be more useful in some applications.

Examples
   220 RED$=CHR$(129)
 1070 PRINT CHR$(8);
makes the cursor move left one position.
PRINT CHR$(7)
causes a short note to be emitted by the loudspeaker.

Description
A string function whose value is a single character string
containing the ascii character specified by the least significant
byte of the numeric argument. Thus CHR$(-1) would give
ascii character number 255.
Note that the statement VDU is probably more useful when
sending characters to the screen, since it involves less typing.
CHR$ is needed when you wish to put a special character into
a string.

Syntax
<string-var> = CHR$(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
ASC, STR$, VAL, VDU

                               217
CLEAR
Purpose
This tells the computer to forget all variables in use previously,
including string variables and arrays but excluding the
“resident integer variables” @% and A% to Z% which are not
affected in any way. See page 62 for an explanation of integer
and string variables.

Examples
   350 CLEAR
CLEAR

Description
A statement which deletes all variables except the resident
integer numeric variables @%…Z%

Syntax
CLEAR

Associated keywords
None

                               218
CLOSE# close file
Purpose
To inform the computer that you have completely finished
with a particular file (see page 188 for an explanation of
“files”). The computer then transfers any data still in memory
to cassette, disc or Econet as needed. See the chapter on file
handling (page 188) for more information.

Example
    90 CLOSE#N

Description
A statement used to CLOSE a specific disc or cassette file.
CLOSE# 0 will close all files.

Syntax
CLOSE# <numeric>

Associated keywords
OPENIN, OPENOUT, OPENUP, EXT#, PTR#,
PRINT#, INPUT#, BGET#, BPUT#, EOF#

                              219
CLG clear the graphics screen
Purpose
To clear the graphics area of the screen. The graphics area of
the screen is left in the colour selected as the “current graphics
background colour”. See the keyword GCOL, page 262, for
more information. The graphics cursor is then moved to its
home position (0,0) which is at the bottom left of the graphics
area.

Examples
   870 CLG
CLG

Description
Clears the current graphics area of the screen and sets this area
to the current graphics background colour in addition. The
statement then moves the graphics cursor to the graphics
origin (0,0).

Syntax
CLG

Associated keywords
CLS, GCOL

                               220
CLS clear the text screen
Purpose
To clear the text area of the screen. Any graphics in this area
will also be cleared. The text area will be left in the “current
text background colour”. The text cursor will then be moved to
its “home” position at the top left of the text area. See the
keyword COLOUR on page 222 for more information about
text background colours.

Examples
   560 CLS
CLS

Description
Clears the current text area and sets this area of the screen to
the current text background colour. The statement then causes
the text cursor to move to the text origin (0,0) at the top left of
the current text area.

Syntax
CLS

Associated keywords
CLG, COLOUR

                                221
COLOUR
Purpose
This statement selects the colour in which the computer is to
print the text and also its background. The command has a
number of variations which are most easily explained by
example.
Type in the following:
MODE 5
COLOUR 1
COLOUR 2
COLOUR 3
and press RETURN at the end of each line as usual.
As you will have seen, these commands change the colour of
the text. This is often called the “text foreground colour”. Now
try
COLOUR 129
COLOUR 130
COLOUR 128
These numbers change the “text background colour”.
In any two colour mode (mode 0,3,4 or 6) the following
normally apply:
    foreground           background    colour
         0                   128       black
         1                   129       white
In any four colour mode (mode 1 or 5) the following normally
apply:
    foreground           background    colour
         0                   128       black
         1                   129       red
         2                   130       yellow
         3                   131       white

                              222
In mode 2 the following normally apply:
 foreground          background     colour
      0                  128        black (normal background)
      1                  129        red
      2                  130        green
      3                  131        yellow
      4                  132        blue
      5                  133        magenta (blue-red)
      6                  134        cyan (blue-green)
      7                  135        white (normal foreground)
      8                  136        flashing black-white
      9                  137        flashing red-cyan
     10                  138        flashing green-magenta
     11                  139        flashing yellow-blue
     12                  140        flashing blue-yellow
     13                  141        flashing magenta-green
     14                  142        flashing cyan-red
     15                  143        flashing white-black
If you are not familiar with basic then you may already have
had too much of this! Nevertheless, it is possible, for example
in a four colour mode to select any four colours from the
available sixteen effects by using another command.
Remember that the colours given above (black, red, yellow,
white) will be available as soon as a four colour mode is
selected – but you can then select others colours later.
Try the following:
MODE 5
COLOUR 1
VDU 19,1,4,0,0,0
VDU 19,1,5,0,0,0
COLOUR 2
VDU 19 2,4 0,0,0
VDU 19,1,3,0,0,0
As you will see the statement VDU 19, can be used to change
the “actual colour” of COLOUR 1 or 2.
The number which follows the VDU 19, is the number that is
referred to by the COLOUR statement. It is referred to as a
“logical colour”.

                              223
The number which follows the “logical colour” referred to as
the “actual colour” and is as follows:
0      black
1      red
2      green
3      yellow
4      blue
5      magenta (blue-red)
6      cyan (blue-green)
7      white
8      flashing black-white
9      flashing red-cyan
10     flashing green-magenta
11     flashing yellow-blue
12     flashing blue-yellow
13     flashing magenta-green
14     flashing cyan-red
15     flashing white-black
thus the statement VDU 19,3,6,0,0,0 will set logical
colour 3 to be cyan. So if in mode 4, a two colour mode, you
wanted black letters on a yellow background you would issue
the command:
VDU 19,1,0,0,0,0
VDU 19,0,3,0,0,0
Alternatively, you could string the whole lot together as
VDU 19,1,0,0,0,0,19,0,3,0,0,0
This combination of the COLOUR statement and the VDU 19
statement enables a very wide range of effects to be obtained.
There are also calls which enable the flash rates of the colours
to be altered as well. See the chapter on FX calls.

Syntax
COLOUR <numeric>

Associated keywords
VDU, GCOL

                               224
COS cosine
Purpose
To calculate the cosine of an angle. Note that the number in
brackets (the angle) is expressed in radians and not in degrees.
To convert from degrees to radians use the function RAD.

Examples
PRINT COS(2.45)
   780 X=COS(Y)
   655 Number=COS(RAD(45))

Description
A function giving the cosine of its argument. The argument
must be given in radians.

Syntax
<num-var> = COS(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
SIN, TAN, ACS, ASN, ATN, DEG, RAD

                              225
COUNT
Purpose
COUNT counts all the characters printed using PRINT,
whether to screen, printer or RS423 output channel.
On the other hand POS returns the current position of the
actual text cursor on the screen.

Examples
   290 A=COUNT
    75 fred=COUNT
PRINT COUNT

Description
A function returning the number of characters printed since the
last new line. COUNT is set to zero if the output stream is
changed.

Syntax
<num-var> = COUNT

Associated keywords
POS

Demonstration program
     5   REM to print a row of 16 * signs
     7   REM this is not the easiest way!
    10   X=16
    20   REPEAT PRINT "*";
    30   UNTIL COUNT=X

                             226
DATA
Purpose
DATA is used in conjunction with the keyword READ, and
sometimes with RESTORE, to enable you to automatically
make available any data (numbers and words) that will be
needed by a program.
For example, if you were writing a geography quiz, you might
want to use the names of 5 countries and their 5 capital cities
each time you used the program. The names of the cities and
countries can be entered as DATA in the program and will
always be there when the program is run.
Computers using the language basic are really quite clumsy at
handling information like this, as the demonstration program
on the next page shows.
In the example program the DATA consists of lots of words.
DATA statements can just as well contain numbers – or a
mixture of words and numbers. In our example the words were
all read into a string array.
It is essential that the DATA contains numbers where numeric
variables are to be filled. Text information eg hello will just
give 0.
There is no need to put each word in inverted commas unless
leading spaces are important in the DATA words, for example
"       four spaces".
If you wish to have leading spaces then these words should be
enclosed in inverted commas. Since a comma is used to
separate items of DATA, if you want a comma in your DATA,
you must enclose the DATA in inverted commas.

Examples
  100 DATA "Allen, Stephen",Stamp
dealer, 01-246 8007, 24
    130 DATA "TOP OF ROOF", 450, January

                              227
Description
A program object which must precede all lists of data intended
for use by the READ statement.

Syntax
DATA
<str-const>|<num-const>{,<str-const>|
<num-const>}

Associated keywords
READ, RESTORE

Demonstration Program
   10 REM geography quiz
   20 DIM city$(5)
   30 DIM country$(5)
   40 FOR x=1 TO 5
   50 READ city$(x)
   60 READ country$(x)
   70 NEXT x
   80 right=0
  110 FOR x=1 TO 10
  120 r=RND(5)
  130 PRINT "What city is the capital"
  140 PRINT "of "; country$(r)
  150 INPUT answer$
  160 IF answer$=city$(r) THEN PROCyes
ELSE PROCno
  170 NEXT x
  180 PRINT "You got ";right;
  190 PRINT " correct out of 10"
  200 END
  500 DATA Paris, France, Reykjavik
  505 DATA Iceland
  510 DATA Moscow, Soviet Union
  520 DATA Athens, Greece
  530 DATA Spitzbergen, Spitzbergen
  600 DEF PROCyes
  610 PRINT "Well done!"
  620 right=right+1
  630 ENDPROC
  700 DEF PROCno

                             228
   710 PRINT "No, the capital of ";
   720 PRINT country$(r);" is ";city$(r)
   730 ENDPROC
Line 10 is just a REMark which the computer ignores.
Lines 20 and 30 tell the computer that we are going to use two
string arrays – one to store the names of the 5 CITYs and the
other to store the names of 5 countries. See page 120 for an
explanation of arrays.
Line 40 sets up a FOR...NEXT loop that will go round 5
times.
Line 50 reads the next word (which will be a city) into the array
city$ and then moves the “data pointer” on to point to the next
word (which will be a country).
Line 60 reads the next piece of DATA into the country$ array.
Line 70 is the end marker of the FOR...NEXT loop.
Lines 110 to 170 loop 10 times through a ‘question and answer’
quiz.
Lines 500 to 530 contain the DATA used above.
Lines 600 to 630 are a procedure to deal with correct replies.
Lines 700 to 730 deal with incorrect replies.

                               229
DEF define
Purpose
The word DEF is used to inform the computer that a
“procedure” or “function” is about to be defined. Once the
computer has been informed that this procedure or function
exists, then the procedure or function can be called by name
anywhere in the program.
The definition of procedures and functions must not occur in the
body of a program. They should be placed in a separate section
which is not executed – for example after the final END in the
program. This also aids readability.
The language basic has many predefined functions which the
computer already knows about. For example, the function SQR
enables it to calculate the square root of a number.
Often though, it is useful to be able to define your own
functions. For example, you might want to have a function
which calculates the VAT inclusive price of a product from the
basic sale price by multiplying by 1.15.
A function always produces a result so you can write
X=FNVAT. A procedure, on the other hand, is used to perform
a number of actions, but it does not by itself produce a
numerical result. For example, a procedure might be set up to
clear the screen and draw a number of lines on the screen.
You may well feel confused, but do not be put off! The use of
procedures and functions may be difficult to understand at first
but it is well worth the effort. Their use greatly enhances the
readability and reliability of programs.
The section below gives a more detailed explanation of the use of
procedures and functions. It should be read in conjunction with the
examples which follow.
Both procedures and functions may contain Local Variables
which are declared using the word LOCAL. In the third
example given below, K is declared as a local variable. This
means that although K is used in this procedure its value is not

                                 230
defined when the procedure finishes. In fact the variable K
might well be used elsewhere in the program. The variable K,
elsewhere within the program, would not be altered by the use
of the local variable K within the procedure. Any variable
which is not declared as LOCAL will be available outside the
procedure, in other words to the rest of the program.
Also both procedures and functions may have parameters
passed to them. Look at the first example program below: line
1010 says
 1010 DEF FNVAT(g)=1.15*g
“g” is called a “formal parameter” for the function FNVAT. It
tells the computer that one number is going to be “passed” to
the function when the function is used – and inside the
function we have decided to use the letter g to represent the
variable.
The procedure is “called” or used like this – for example
   230 PRINT "VAT inclusive price ";
   235 PRINT FNVAT(P)
and in this case “P” is the “actual parameter” for the function
FNVAT. Whatever value “P” has will be used inside the
procedure wherever reference is made to the “formal
parameter” “g”. This is very convenient since you can use any
variable names that you like for the parameters inside the
procedure. Then you can call the procedure with a quite
different set of parameter names from the outside. Very often a
procedure will be called from many different places in the
program – and the actual parameters may have different names
each time the procedure or function is called.
If a procedure or function is defined with (say) 3 formal
parameters then, when it is called, 3 actual parameters must be
supplied. See the fifth example below where three parameters
are passed to the function.
The end of the procedure is indicated with the statement
ENDPROC. The end of a multi-line function is indicated by a
statement that starts with an = sign. The function is given the
value of the expression to the right of the = sign.

                              231
Examples
First example – full program
  210    REPEAT
  220    INPUT "Basic price ",P
  230    PRINT "VAT inclusive price ";
  235    PRINT FNVAT(P)
  240    UNTIL P=0
  250    END
 1000    REM one Line numeric function
 1010    DEF FNVAT(g)=1.15*g

Second example – program section
Multi-line string function with one string parameter
 1000 DEF FNREVERSE(A$)
 1010 REM reverse the order of the
letters in A$
 1015 REM
 1020 LOCAL d%,B$
 1030 FOR d%=1 TO LEN(A$)
 1040 B$=MID$(A$,d%,1)+B$
 1050 NEXT d%
 1060 =B$

Third example – program section
Multi-line procedure with 1 parameter
   200   DEF PROCbye(X)
   210   REM print bye X times
   220   LOCAL K
   230   FOR K=1 TO X
   240   PRINT "bye"
   250   NEXT K
   260   ENDPROC

Fourth example – program section
This sets the background colour to a new value given in the
parameter.
    10   DEF PROCINITSCREEN(X)
    20   REM clear screen and draw border
    25   COLOUR 128+X
    30   CLS

                               232
    40   DRAW 1279,0
    50   DRAW 1279,1023
    60   DRAW 0,1023
    70   DRAW 0,0
    80   ENDPROC

Fifth example – full program
  110    INPUT X,Y,Z
  120    M=FNMEAN(X,Y,Z)
  130    PRINT "The mean of ",X,Y,Z
  140    PRINT "is ";M
  150    END
 8990    REM Single Line numeric function
 8995    REM with three parameters
 9000    DEF FNMEAN(A,B,C)=(A+B+C)/3

Description
A program object which must precede declaration of a user
function or procedure. String and numeric functions and
procedures may be defined. Multi-line functions and
procedures are allowed. Procedures and functions need not be
defined before they are called. All procedures and functions
must be placed in the program where they will not be executed
e.g. after the END statement.

Syntax
DEF FN|PROC<variable name>[(
<string-var>|<num-var>{,<string-var>|
<num-var>})]

Associated keywords
ENDPROC, FN, PROC

                               233
DEG degrees
Purpose
This function converts angles which are expressed in radians
into degrees. 1 radian is equal to about 57 degrees.

Examples
   100 X=DEG(PI/2)
   300 angle=DEG(1.36)
PRINT DEG(PI/2)

Syntax
<num-var> = DEG(<numeric>)

Description
A function which converts radians to degrees.

Associated keywords
RAD, SIN, COS, TAN, ACS, ASN, ATN

                             234
DELETE
Purpose
The DELETE command is used to delete a group of lines from
a program. It cannot be used as part of a program. You can
specify which lines should be deleted with a command of the
form
DELETE 120,340
This would remove everything between line 120 and line 340
inclusive.
To delete everything up to a certain line number (for example
up to line 290) use DELETE 0,290.
To delete from line 500 to the last line, use as the “last line to be
deleted” any number greater than the last line number in the
program. Since the largest line number allowed is 32767,
DELETE 500,32767
will do the trick, but will take a long time.
To delete a single line just type the line number and press
RETURN. There is no need to use the DELETE command.

Examples
DELETE 0,540
DELETE 180,753
DELETE 540,32000

Syntax
DELETE <num-const>,<num-const>

Description
A command enabling a range of lines to be deleted from a
program. Since DELETE is a command it cannot be used in a
program or as part of a multiple statement line.

Associated keywords
LIST, OLD, NEW
                                235
DIM dimension of an array
Purpose
As well as simple numeric and string variables (such as “X”
and “name$”) it is possible to work with “arrays” of variables.
These are extremely useful when working with groups of
numbers or words. For example if one wanted to work with a
set of information about the rooms in an hotel with 4 floors,
each with 30 rooms, then an array of 4 by 30 entries can be
created thus
DIM hotel(4,30)
Having set up an array, one can enter information into each of
its “elements”. For example the cost of the room per night
might be £23.50
hotel(1,22)=23.50
hotel(4,1)=145.00
In practice the statement DIM hotel(4,30) produces an
array of 5 by 31 entries since the lowest array element is
hotel(0,0).
All the above arrays are called “two dimension numeric
arrays”. Another array could contain the names of guests
DIM name$(4,30)
name$(1,22)="Fred Smith"
name$(4,1)="The Queen"
That sort of array is called a “two dimension string array”.
Arrays may have one or more dimensions. A single dimension
array would be appropriate for all the houses in a road. e.g.
DIM MainSt(150)
That sort of array is called a “single dimension numeric array”.
All arrays are normally dimensioned very early in the
program. It is “illegal” to attempt to change the size of an array
by re-dimensioning it later in the program. An array may have
as many dimensions and as many elements in each dimension
as the computer has space for – but you tend to run out of
                               236
computer memory pretty fast with large arrays! It is essential
that there is no space between the array name and the first
bracket. Thus DIM A(10) is correct but DIM A (10) will
not define an array.

Examples
   100 DIM partnumbers(1000)
 3000 DIM employeename$(35)
   240 DIM All_hours_in_the_week(24,7)
   100 DIM A(X)

Description
A statement which dimensions arrays. Arrays must be
predeclared before use. After dimensioning all elements of
arrays are initialised to zero for numeric arrays or null strings
in the case of string arrays. The lowest element in an array is
element zero. Thus DIM X(4) would create an array of 5
elements (0 to 4 inclusive).
There is a second and quite different use for the DIM
statement. It can be used to reserve bytes in memory for special
applications. To reserve 25 bytes, type
DIM X 24
Notice two things about this statement: firstly the space
between the variable X and the (number of bytes minus 1) and
secondly the absence of brackets around the “24”. The address
of the start of the group of 25 bytes is given in the variable X in
this example.

Syntax
DIM <num-var>|<str-var>
(<numeric>{,<numeric>})
DIM <num-var> <numeric>

Associated keywords
None

                                237
DIV division of whole numbers
Purpose
See page 299 which describes the word MOD for a full
explanation. DIV is an operator which gives the whole number
part of the result of a division. Thus
PRINT 11 DIV 4
gives 2 (leaving a “remainder” of 3).

Description
A binary operator performing integer division between its
operands. The operands are converted to integers before
division takes place.

Syntax
<num-var> = <numeric> DIV <numeric>

Associated keywords
MOD

                              238
DRAW
Purpose
This statement draws lines on the screen in MODEs 0,1,2,4 and
5. The DRAW statement is followed by two numbers which are
the X and Y co-ordinates of the end of the line. The line starting
point can either be the end of the last line that was drawn or
else a new point if the MOVE statement has been used before
the statement DRAW.
The screen is addressed as
1280 points wide X-axis, 0–1279
1024 points high Y-axis, 0–1023
regardless of the graphics mode selected. The origin (position
0,0) is normally at the bottom left of the screen.
The line is drawn in the current graphics foreground colour.
This can be changed using the GCOL statement.

Examples
   780 DRAW X,Y
DRAW 135,200

Description
DRAW X,Y means draw a line to X, Y in the current
foreground colour.
DRAW X,Y is equivalent to PLOT 5,X,Y.
DRAW is one of a large group of line drawing statements. See
PLOT on page 319 for others.

Syntax
DRAW <numeric>,<numeric>

Associated keywords
MODE, PLOT, MOVE, CLG, VDU, GCOL

                               239
Demonstration Program
  140   MODE 5
  160   REM Red background
  170   GCOL 0,129
  175   CLG
  180   REM Yellow foreground
  190   GCOL 0,2
  200   REM draw a box
  210   MOVE 100,100
  220   DRAW 400,100
  230   DRAW 400,400
  240   DRAW 100,400
  250   DRAW 100,100

                        240
ELSE
Purpose
To provide an alternative course of action. ELSE can be used
following an IF...THEN statement. See the pages
describing the associated keywords and section 16 page 98 for
more details.

Examples
  560 IF length > 0 THEN PRINT "O.K."
ELSE PRINT "No good"
  100 IF A<>B THEN C=D ELSE PRINT
"Values match"

Description
Part of the IF...THEN...ELSE structure.

Syntax
IF <testable condition> THEN
<statement> [ELSE <statement>]

Associated keywords
IF, THEN, ON

                             241
END
Purpose
This informs the computer that it has reached the end of the
program. END is optional but may be used as many times as
required in a program.

Example
 9000 END

Description
Optional end-of-program which may occur anywhere and as
often as is required.
The command END has a special use in that it causes basic to
search the program in memory for a valid end program
marker. basic then updates its internal pointers. This may be
useful after unusual loading procedures. If the user changes the
value of PAGE then internal pointers such as TOP will not be
reset until an END statement or command is met.

Syntax
END

Associated keywords
STOP

                              242
ENDPROC end procedure
Purpose
This indicates the end of a PROCEDURE definition. See the
keyword DEF on page 230 for more information.

Examples
 1000    DEF PROCdash(param)
 1010    REM print dashes lots of times
 1020    REM in fact "param" dashes in
total
 1025    REM
 1030    LOCAL counter
 1040    FOR counter=1 TO param
 1050    PRINT "-";
 1060    NEXT counter
 1070    ENDPROC
 2010    DEF PROCtriangle(A,B,C,D,E,F)
 2020    REM fill a triangle with colour
 2050    MOVE A,B
 2060    MOVE C,D
 2070    PLOT 85,E,F
 2100    ENDPROC

Description
Part of the DEF PROC...ENDPROC structure.

Syntax
ENDPROC

Associated keywords
DEF, FN, PROC, LOCAL

                            243
ENVELOPE
Purpose
The envelope statement is used with the SOUND statement to
control the volume and pitch of a sound while it is playing. All
natural sounds change in volume (loudness or amplitude); for
example, the sounds from a piano start off loudly and then fade
away. An aircraft flying overhead starts off softly, gets louder
and then fades away.
The variation of amplitude (loudness) for the aircraft, as it flew
overhead, might well look something like this:
loudness
in phons

      130
                                loudest

                                                                   soft
           0
               0          5               10           15         20 time in seconds

This variation of amplitude with time is described as an
“amplitude envelope”.
Some sounds change in pitch. For example, a wailing police
siren

       3000
frequency
in Hertz
      2000

      1000

           0
                   0.2   0.4      0.6    0.8   1.0   1.2
                               time in seconds

This variation of pitch with time is called a “pitch envelope”.
The BBC computer can use both pitch and amplitude envelopes
and these are set up with the ENVELOPE statement.

                                                            244
Example
    10 ENVELOPE 1,1,4,-4,4,10,20,10,
127,0,0,-5,126,126
    20 SOUND 1,1,100,200

Description
The ENVELOPE statement is followed by 14 parameters.
ENVELOPE N,T,PI1,PI2,PI3,PN1,PN2,
PN3,AA,AD,AS,AR,ALA,ALD

Parameter       Range         Function
N              1 to 4         Envelope Number
T bits 0-6     0 to 127       Length of each step in
                              hundredths of a second
  bit 7        0 or 1         0=auto-repeat the pitch envelope
                              1=don’t auto-repeat
PI1       -128 to 127         Change of pitch per step in
                              section 1
PI2       -128 to 127         Change of pitch per step in
                              section 2
PI3       -128 to 127         Change of pitch per step in
                              section 3
PN1          0 to 255         Number of steps in section 1
PN2          0 to 255         Number of steps in section 2
PN3          0 to 255         Number of steps in section 3
AA        -127 to 127         Change of amplitude per step
                              during attack phase
AD        -127 to 127         Change of amplitude per step
                              during decay phase
AS        -127 to 0           Change of amplitude per step
                              during sustain phase
AR        -127 to 0           Change of amplitude per step
                              during release phase
ALA            0 to 126       Target of level at end of attack
                              phase
ALD            0 to 126       Target of level at end of decay
                              phase

The N parameter specifies the envelope number that is to be
defined. It normally has a value in the range 1 to 4. If the basic
statement BPUT# is not being used then envelope numbers up
to and including 16 may be used.

                               245
The T parameter determines the length in centi-seconds of each
step of the pitch and amplitude envelopes. The pitch envelope
normally auto-repeats but this can be suppressed by setting the
top bit of T – i.e. using values of T greater than 127.
The six parameters PI1, PI2, PI3, PN1, PN2 and PN3
determine the pitch envelope. The pitch envelope has 3 sections
and each section is specified with two parameters: the
increment which may be positive or negative, and the number
of times the increment is to be applied during that section, that
is the number of steps. A typical pitch envelope might look like

pitch
    160

    140

    120

    100

        80                           PI 1                PI 2

        60

        40                                                                                                  PI 3

        20           1st sect. PN1
                                                                  PN2
         0
             0   2    4    6   8     10     12   14   16 18 20 22 24 26       28   30   32   34   36   38   40   42
                                                      time in centi-seconds

In the above example
T = 1 centi-second
PI1 = +10                      PN1 = 12
PI2 = –5                       PN2 = 27
PI3 = +50                      PN3 = 3
The pitch envelope is added to the pitch parameter (P) given in
the SOUND statement. In the above example it must have been
40 since the pitch starts at 40. If bit 7 of the T parameter is zero
then at the end of the pitch envelope; at a time given by the
equation.
time = (PN1 + PN2 + PN3) * T centi-seconds
the pitch envelope will be set to zero and will repeat
automatically. Note that the pitch can only take on values in
the range 0 to 255 and values outside this range “fold over”,
that is the value used is MOD 256 of the value calculated.

                                                                246
The six parameters AA, AD, AS, AR, ALA and ALD determine
the amplitude envelope. Although the current internal sound
generator has only 16 amplitude levels the software is upward
compatible with a generator having 128 levels.
The shape of the amplitude envelope is defined in terms of
rates (increments) between levels, and is an extended form of
the standard adsr system of envelope control. The envelope
starts at zero and then climbs at a rate set by AA (the attack
rate) until it reaches the level set by ALA. It then climbs or falls
at the rate set by AD (the decay rate) until it reaches the level
set by ALD. However, if AD is zero the amplitude will stay at
the level set by ALA for the duration (D) of the sound.
The envelope then enters the sustain phase which lasts for the
remaining duration (D) of the sound. The duration, D, is set by
the SOUND statement. During the sustain phase the amplitude
will remain the same or fall at a rate set by AS.
At the end of the sustain phase the note will be terminated if
there is another note waiting to be played on the selected
channel. If no note is waiting then the amplitude will decay at a
rate set by AR until the amplitude reaches zero. If AR is zero
then the note will continue indefinitely, with the pitch envelope
auto-repeating if bit 7 of parameter T is zero.
A typical amplitude envelope might look like

amplitude                    duration
            attack   decay                                 release
                                         sustain            phase
ALA   120
                                          phase
      100

ADA    80

       60

       40

       20

        0
            0   4     10     14       20           30 34   40        50
                                  time in centi-seconds

In the above example
T = 1 centi-second
ALA = 120
ADA = 80

                                                           247
AA   = 30 (120 in 4 centi-seconds)
AD   = –4 (–40 in 10 centi-seconds)
AS   =0
AR   = –5 (–80 in 16 centi-seconds)
Note that the amplitude cannot be moved outside the range 0
to 126.

Syntax
ENVELOPE <numeric>,<numeric>,<numeric>,
<numeric>,<numeric>,<numeric>,
<numeric>,<numeric>,<numeric>,
<numeric>,<numeric>,<numeric>,
<numeric>,<numeric>

Associated keywords
ADVAL, SOUND

                             248
EOF# end of file
Purpose
This function is used to tell whether the end of the file has been
reached or not. The function returns the value 0 or –1. It
returns the value –1 if the end of the file has been reached. The
number following EOF# is the channel number of the file.
Refer to page 192 for more information.

Example
   100 X=EOF#(channel)
   200 REPEAT UNTIL EOF#(y)

Description
The function used to determine whether the end of the file has
been reached or not.

Syntax
<num-var> = EOF#(<num-var>)

Associated Keywords
OPENIN, OPENOUT, OPENUP, EXT#, PTR#,
PRINT#, INPUT#, BGET#, BPUT#, CLOSE#

                               249
EOR exclusive-or
Purpose
This is a special logical operator often used to complement
certain bits in a byte selectively. Refer to page 205, which
explains the keyword AND, for an introduction to the concepts
involved.
The process of exclusive-or tests whether the corresponding
bits in two numbers are the same or different. If the
corresponding bits in the two numbers are different then the
resultant bit will be a 1, if they are the same it will be set to
zero.
Another way of looking at this process is that it complements
(changes 0 to 1 and 1 to 0) those bits in one number which are
at logic 1 in the other number. Thus if
X           0000 1100 0011 0000 1110 1011
Y           1011 1111 0000 1010 0010 1000
then
X EOR Y     1011 0011 0011 1010 1100 0011

Examples
   100 d% = A% EOR &FFFF00
   200 R = X EOR Y

Description
An operator performing the operation of logical bitwise
exclusive-or between the two operands.

Syntax
<num-var> = <numeric> EOR <numeric>

Associated keywords
NOT, AND, OR

                                250
ERL error line number
Purpose
This enables the program to find out the line number where the
last error occurred. See page 147 for more information.

Example
 8500 X=ERL
 8100 IF ERL=100 THEN PRINT "I didn't
understand"
   300 IF ERL=10000 THEN CLOSE#0

Description
A function returning the line number of the line where the last
error occurred.

Syntax
<num-var> = ERL

Associated keywords
ON ERROR GOTO, ON ERROR OFF, REPORT,
ERR

                              251
ERR error number
Purpose
If the computer finds an error that it cannot cope with, it may
give up and report the error on the screen. In addition it
remembers an “error number”. For example if you try to
calculate with numbers which are too large for the computer it
will report “Too big” and remember error number 20.
Pressing the ESCAPE key behaves as an error (error number
17) and you can detect this and act on it if you wish.
It is possible to make the computer deal with most of these
errors itself by writing special sections of the program to deal
with the inevitable! These sections of the program need to
know what the error was and where it occurred.
The function ERR enables your program to find the “error
number” of the last error which occurred. This is usually used
to enable the program to respond helpfully to an error caused
by the user.

Examples
 1000 wrong=ERR
  100 IF ERR=17 THEN PRINT "YOU CAN'T
ESCAPE!"
 1230 IF ERR=18 THEN PRINT "You can't
divide by zero!"

Description
Returns the error number of the last error which occurred.

Syntax
<num-var> = ERR

Associated keywords
ON ERROR GOTO, ON ERROR OFF, ERL,
REPORT

                               252
EVAL evaluate
Purpose
This function is mainly used to enable the user to type an
expression, such as a mathematical equation, into the computer
while a program is running.
For example suppose that a program has to plot a graph; you
need a way of getting your equation into the computer while a
program is running. In most versions of basic. this is very
difficult to do. With the BBC basic the equation is put into a
string and then EVAL is used to tell the computer to “work out
the string”.
This function is not common in other versions of basic so a few
more specific examples are given of legal instructions which
can be evaluated by the statement EVAL A$
A$="M*X+C"
A$="SIN(x/120)+COS(x/30)"
Note that EVAL can only be used to evaluate functions
(SIN, COS, SQR etc.) and cannot be used to execute a
statement like MODE 4.

Examples
   100 X=EVAL(A$)
   234 value=EVAL(z$)

Description
A statement which applies the interpreter’s expression
evaluation program to the characters held in the argument
string. An easy way to pass a function into a program from a
user input.

Syntax
<num-var> = EVAL(<string>)
<str-var> = EVAL(<string>)

                             253
Associated keywords
VAL, STR$

Demonstration program
    10   INPUT A$
    20   FOR X=1 TO 5
    30   Y=EVAL(A$)
    40   PRINT Y
    50   NEXT X
>RUN
?5*X
             5
            10
            15
            20
            25
The second program makes the computer act as a calculator.
     5   REPEAT
    10   INPUT B$
    20   PRINT EVAL B$
    30   UNTIL FALSE
>RUN
?3+4
         7
?SIN (RAD (45))
0.707106781
?

                            254
EXP exponent
Purpose
This mathematical function calculates e (2.7183…) raised to any
specified power.

Examples
   120 Y=EXP(X)
 3000 pressure=EXP(height)

Description
A function returning e to the power of its argument.

Syntax
<num-var> = EXP(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
LN, LOG

                              255
EXT# extent
Purpose
This finds out how large a particular file is. It only works with
disc and network file systems – not with cassette files. The
number returned is the number of bytes allocated to the file.
The file to be investigated must have been opened using the
OPENIN or OPENOUT statements. See page 188 for more
information on file handling.

Examples
   100 X=EXT#(employee)
PRINT EXT#(N)

Description
A function which returns the length in bytes of the file opened
on the channel given in its argument.

Syntax
<num-var> = EXT#(<num-var>)

Associated keywords
CLOSE#, PTR#, INPUT#, PRINT#, BGET#,
BPUT#, OPENIN, OPENOUT, OPENUP, EOF#

                               256
FALSE
Purpose
Sometimes the computer has to decide whether or not
something is true. For example:
     10 X=12
     20 IF X=20 THEN PRINT "X EQUALS 20"
Clearly, in this example, the statement X=20 is false. As a
result the program will never print X EQUALS 20.
   100      X=12
   110      REPEAT
   120      PRINT "HELLO"
   130      UNTIL X=20
would repeatedly print HELLO because X will never be
anything else than 12. X=20 is FALSE. The same effect can be
achieved by writing
   110 REPEAT
   120 PRINT "HELLO"
   130 UNTIL FALSE
which means, repeat for ever.
In fact, the computer has a numerical value of FALSE, which
is zero. Thus
PRINT FALSE
will print 0.
Similarly
PRINT 5=4
will also print 0, since 5=4 is false.
It is often useful to say in a program for example
CLOCKSET = FALSE
and then later one can say

                                257
IF CLOCKSET THEN PRINT "THE CLOCK IS
CORRECT"

Examples
   100 oldenough = FALSE
   245 UNTIL FALSE

Description
A function returning the value zero.

Syntax
<num-var> = FALSE

Associated keywords
TRUE

                              258
FN function
Purpose
FN preceding a variable name indicates that it is being used as
the name of a function. Both string and numeric functions may
be defined. See the keyword DEF on page 230 and sections 17
and 18 for a more detailed description of functions and
procedures.
Since a function always returns a value it often appears on the
right of an equals sign or in a print statement. Procedures, on
the other hand do not return results.

Example
 1000 DEF FNmean2(x,y)=(x+y)/2

Description
A reserved word used at the start of all user-defined functions.

Syntax
FN<variable-name>[(<num-var>|
<str-var>{,<num-var>|<str-var>})]

Associated keywords
DEF, LOCAL, PROC, ENDPROC

                              259
FOR
Purpose
The word FOR is one of the words used in a FOR...NEXT
loop. This makes the computer execute a series of statements a
specified number of times; for example:
   120 FOR X=1 TO 5
   130 PRINT X
   140 NEXT X
would print out the numbers 1,2,3,4,5.
The variable X in the above example initially takes on the
value 1 and the program then goes through until it reaches the
word NEXT. The program then returns to the line or statement
FOR X=1 TO 5 and X is increased in value by 1. The
program continues the loop, increasing the value of X in steps
of 1, until X reaches 5. After that, the program no longer loops;
instead it moves onto the next statement after the
FOR...NEXT loop.
As an option the “step size” can be changed. In the example
above X increased by 1 each time around the loop. In the next
example XYZ increases by 0.3 each time around the loop.
   230 FOR XYZ=5 TO 6 STEP 0.3
   240 PRINT XYZ
   250 NEXT XYZ
The above program would print out the numbers
             5
           5.3
           5.6
           5.9
The value of XYZ on exit from the above program would be 6.2
The step size may be negative if you wish to make the value of
the “control variable” decrease each time around the loop.

                               260
   870 FOR r2d2%=99 TO 60 STEP -12
   880 PRINT r2d2%; " Hi there"
   890 NEXT r2d2%
would print
              99   Hi   there
              87   Hi   there
              75   Hi   there
              63   Hi   there
The FOR...NEXT loop always executes once so
FOR D=5 TO 3: PRINT D: NEXT D
would print 5 and then stop.

Examples
  300 FOR X=1 TO 16 STEP 0.3: PRINT X:
NEXT X
 1040 FOR A%=0 TO MAXIMUM%
   560 FOR TEMPERATURE=0 TO 9

Description
A statement initialising a FOR...NEXT loop. This structure
always executes at least once. Any assignable numeric item
may be used as the control variable but integer control
variables are about three times faster than real variables.

Syntax
FOR <num-var> = <numeric> TO <numeric>
[STEP <numeric>]

Associated keywords
TO, STEP, NEXT

                               261
GCOL graphics colour
Purpose
This statement sets the colour to be used by all subsequent
graphics operations. In other words it selects the graphics
foreground colour and the graphics background colour. It also
specifies how the colour is to be placed on the screen. The
colour can be plotted directly, ANDed, ORed or
Exclusive-ORed with the colour already there, or the colour
there can be inverted.
The first number specifies the mode of action as follows:
0    plot the colour specified
1    OR the specified colour with that already there
2    AND the specified colour with that already there
3    Exclusive-OR the specified colour with that already there
4    invert the colour already there
The second number defines the logical colour to be used in
future. If the number is greater than 127 then it defines the
graphics background colour. If the number is less than 128 then
it defines the graphics foreground colour. See the keyword
COLOUR for more information.

Example
    100 GCOL 0,2
GCOL 3,129

Description
This statement is used to select the logical colours used by
graphics statements.

Syntax
GCOL <numeric>,<numeric>

Associated keywords
CLS, CLG, MODE, COLOUR, PLOT

                               262
GET
Purpose
This function waits for a key to be pressed on the keyboard and
then returns with the ascii number of the key pressed. See page
64 for a description of ascii numbers.
The GET function is used whenever the computer needs to
wait for a reply from the user before continuing.
Note that when using GET the character typed on the
keyboard will not appear on the screen. If you wish it to appear
you must then ask the computer to print it.

Examples
 1040 keyhit=GET
   350 X=GET

Description
A function which waits for the next character from the input
stream. The function then returns the ascii value of the
character.

Syntax
<num-var> = GET

Associated keywords
GET$, INKEY, INKEY$

                              263
GET$
Purpose
The GET$ function waits for a key to be pressed on the
keyboard and then returns with a string containing the
character pressed. See the previous keyword GET for a similar
function and for further explanation.
For example, at the end of a game program you may wish the
computer to ask the player whether or not he wants another go.
The demonstration program below shows how this can be
done.
Note that when using GET$ the character typed on the
keyboard will not appear on the screen. If you wish it to appear
you must then ask the computer to print it.

Example
 1050 A$=GET$

Syntax
<string-var> = GET$

Associated keywords
GET, INKEY, INKEY$

Demonstration Program
 2100 PRINT "Do you want to play
another game";
 2120 REM if user presses Y then
 2130 REM go to line 100
 2140 IF GET$="Y" THEN GOTO 100
 2160 REM if it gets this far then the
 2170 REM reply was not "Y" so give up!
 2180 STOP

                              264
GOSUB go to a subroutine
Purpose
Quite often a group of lines in a program needs to be used in a
number of different places within the main program. Instead of
repeating the same piece of program several times one can
separate out a small sub-section into a subroutine. This
subroutine can then be “called” from a number of different
places in the main program by means of the statement GOSUB.
The end of a subroutine is indicated by the word RETURN.
This causes the program to return to the statement after the
GOSUB statement.
Beware of a subroutine calling itself too many times: “a depth”
of 26 subroutines is the maximum that is allowed.
As with GOTO, it is possible to GOSUB to a calculated line
number. The same cautions that apply to GOTO apply to
GOSUB in this case.

Example
 1020 GOSUB 4000

Description
A statement used to call a section of program as a subroutine.
One subroutine may call another subroutine (or itself) up to a
maximum nested depth of 26.

Syntax
GOSUB <numeric>

Associated keywords
RETURN, ON

                              265
Demonstration Program
First, here is a program to print out random phrases without
using a subroutine
  100 REM A$ contains 7 words and each
word
  105 REM contains 5 characters -
letters or spaces
  110 A$="hand mouthear leg arm
chestelbow"
  120 FOR count=1 TO 10
  125 REM pick a random number
  130 R=RND(7)
  140 REM and use it to pick a random
word
  150 B$=MID$(A$,5*R-4,5)
  160 REM print a message
  170 PRINT "My ";B$;" hurts"
  180 REM get another random word
  190 R=RND(7)
  200 B$=MID$(A$,5*R-4,5)
  210 REM and print out a second
message
  220 PRINT "Is your ";B$;" alright?"
  230 NEXT count
Now look at the same program using a subroutine and with the
REMs (remarks) removed.
  110 A$="hand mouthear leg arm
chestelbow"
  120 FOR count=1 TO 10
  150 GOSUB 810
  170 PRINT "My ";B$" hurts"
  190 GOSUB 810
  220 PRINT "Is your ";B$ " alright?"
  230 NEXT count
  240 END
  810 B$=MID$(A$,5*RND(7)-4,5)
  820 RETURN

                             266
The “7” in line 810 is there to select one of the 7 words in A$. In
line 810 both the “5”s are there because each word contains five
letters or spaces. It is essential that all the words contain the
same number of characters.
Finally, here is the same program written with a string
function, with REMs left out and generally tidied up.
  110 A$="hand mouthear leg arm
chestelbow"
  120 FOR count=1 TO 10
  170 PRINT "My ";FNword;" hurts"
  220 PRINT "Is your ";FNword;"
alright?"
  230 NEXT count
  240 END
  800 DEF FNword=MID$(A$,5*RND(7)-4,5)

                               267
GOTO go to a line number
Purpose
This statement makes the computer jump to a specified line
number instead of continuing to the next one in the program. It
changes the order in which the computer executes a program.
Although GOTO is simple to use, do so with caution! It is all
too easy to make a program difficult to follow by using too
many GOTOs. Following a program full of GOTOs is like
trying to disentangle a plateful of spaghetti and arrange it in a
straight line!
Adherents of “structured programming” encourage program
writers to use structures like REPEAT...UNTIL and
FOR...NEXT and to avoid most (but not all) GOTO
statements.
It is possible in this version of basic to GOTO a variable. In the
following example the destination variable is called
“somewhere”:
     10 somewhere=1005
     20 GOTO somewhere
but this feature must be used with great care since, if the
program is renumbered using the RENUMBER command, the
program will probably then branch to the wrong line.
Note that if the destination line number is to be calculated
using a mathematical expression then that expression must be
in brackets.
GOTO can be used as a command to start a program without
destroying the values assigned to the variables.

Examples
GOTO 330
   100 IF X>5 THEN GOTO 2000
   100 GOTO (starts*55+14)

                               268
Description
A statement used to transfer control to a specified or calculated
line number unconditionally.

Syntax
GOTO <numeric>

                               269
HIMEM highest memory location
Purpose
basic uses the computer’s random access memory (ram) to
store the user’s program, all the variables that the program
uses, and memory for high-resolution graphics displays.
In the absence of other instructions the computer divides the
available memory up in a sensible way. However there are
occasions, particularly when changing display modes and
when writing machine code programs, when you may wish to
tell basic how to divide up the available memory.
One way of changing the allocation is by altering the value of
the variable HIMEM. This variable contains the address of the
highest memory location that basic uses for your program and
variables. It is automatically set to just below the memory used
for the screen when the mode is selected. Addresses above
HIMEM are not used by basic.
If it is manually altered then locations above HIMEM may be
used by the programmer for other things, for example for
machine code subroutines.
If you wish to change the value of HIMEM you should
normally do so very early in your program – preferably right at
the beginning. The beginning of the program is also the place
to select the display mode that you will be using.
Other important boundaries are PAGE, TOP and LOMEM. The
memory map on page 500 gives an indication of their relative
positions.

Examples
   100 HIMEM=HIMEM-40
   100 PRINT HIMEM
   100 HIMEM=&2800

                              270
Description
HIMEM contains the address of the first byte that basic does
not use. This pseudo-variable must not be altered while
executing a function or a procedure. Alter it with great care!

Syntax
HIMEM = <numeric>
or
<num-var> = HIMEM

Associated keywords
LOMEM, PAGE, TOP

                              271
IF
Purpose
This sets up a test condition which can be used to control the
subsequent action of the computer.

Examples
   100 IF month=12 THEN PRINT "December"
  100 IF A=1 THEN PRINT "One" ELSE
PRINT "Not one"
  100 IF answer$="BANANA" THEN
PROCfruit
  100 IF height<1.94 OR age<18 THEN
GOTO 1030
   100 IF length<>5 THEN 2140
  100 IF RATE=5 THEN Y=6:Z=8 ELSE PRINT
"Wrong rate"
  100 IF month=11 THEN IF day=5 THEN
PRINT "Guy Fawkes"
  100 IF month=1 AND day=1 THEN PRINT
"New Year"
   100 IF X THEN Y=0
Description
A statement forming part of the IF...THEN...ELSE
structure. The word THEN is optional, as is the ELSE section.
Syntax
IF <testable condition> [THEN]
<statement>
or
IF <testable condition> THEN <line
number>
Associated keywords
THEN, ELSE
                              272
                        input the number of the
INKEY                   key pressed

Purpose
This function waits for a specified time whilst constantly
testing to see if a key has been pressed on the keyboard.
If a key is pressed before the time runs out then the ascii value
of the key is given. If no key is pressed in the given time then -1
is returned and the program continues. See the keyword ASC
on page 207 for an explanation of ascii values.
Note that a key can be pressed at any time before INKEY is
used. All keys pressed are stored in a buffer in the computer
and a character is removed from the buffer by, for example, the
INPUT statement. You can “flush” the buffer of all characters
by giving the command
*FX 15,1
The number in brackets, after the word INKEY, gives the
amount of time that the computer must wait before giving up.
The time is given in hundredths of a second, and may have any
value between 0 and 32767.
In addition, the function INKEY can be used to see if a key is
actually pressed at the instant the function is called. Normally
pressing a key once enters the code for that key into the
keyboard buffer. If the key is kept down then it will normally
auto-repeat and further characters will be entered into the
buffer. However, when the buffer is read with INPUT or GET
or INKEY, you will have no idea how long the character has
been waiting in the buffer. An alternative statement is
provided which actually tests the keyboard rather than the
buffer.
INKEY with a negative number in the brackets e.g.
INKEY(-27) will enable you to test to see whether a
particular key is pressed at that instant. The number in brackets
determines which key you wish to test. The following table
shows the negative number to be used to test any particular
key. Thus the letter L would be tested with PRINT INKEY
(-87).
                               273
Examples
   100 keynumber=INKEY(5)
   220 result=INKEY(Y)
X=INKEY(100)

Description
A function which waits up to a specified time for a key to be
pressed. The function returns -1 if no key is pressed in the
specified time, or the ascii value of the key pressed. The
argument is the maximum time in centi-seconds.

Syntax
<num-var> = INKEY(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
GET, GET$, INKEY$

                              274
Key   Number   Key          Number

f0       –33   1               –49
f1      –114   2               –50
f2      –115   3               –18
f3      –116   4               –19
f4       –21   5               –20
f5      –117   6               –53
f6      –118   7               –37
f7       –23   8               –22
f8      –119   9               –39
f9      –120   0               –40
A        –66   –               –24
B       –101   ^               –25
C        –83   \              –121
D        –51   @               –72
E        –35   [               –57
F        –68   __              –41
G        –84   ;               –88
H        –85   :               –73
I        –38   ]               –89
J        –70   ,              –103
K        –71   .              –104
L        –87   /              –105
M       –102   ESCAPE         –113
N        –86   TAB             –97
O        –55   CAPS LOCK       –65
P        –56   CTRL             –2
Q        –17   SHIFT LOCK      –81
R        –52   SHIFT            –1
S        –82   SPACE BAR       –99
T        –36   DELETE          –90
U        –54   COPY           –106
V       –100   RETURN          –74
W        –34   h               –58
X        –67   i               –42
Y        –69   f               –26
Z        –98   g              –122

               275
                           input the character
INKEY$                     pressed

Purpose
This function waits for a specified time whilst constantly
testing to see if a key has been pressed on the keyboard. If a
key is pressed before the time runs out then the letter or
number pressed is placed in the string variable. If no key is
pressed in the given time then an empty string is returned and
the program continues.
Note that a key can be pressed at any time before INKEY$ is
used. All keys pressed are stored in a buffer in the computer
and a character is removed from the buffer by, for example, the
INPUT statement. You can flush the buffer of all characters by
giving the command
*FX 15,1
The number in brackets, after the word INKEY$, gives the
amount of time that the computer must wait before giving up.
The time is given in hundredths of a second.

Examples
   120 letter$=INKEY$(0)
   384 result$=INKEY$(100)
   920 X$=INKEY$(Y)

Description
A function which waits for a key to be pressed within a
specified period of time. The function returns a null string, if
no key is pressed in the specified time. If a key is pressed the
string returned consists of the single character pressed. The
argument is the maximum time in centi-seconds.

Syntax
<string-var> = INKEY$(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
GET, GET$, INKEY
                               276
                       to put information into
INPUT                  the computer

Purpose
When a computer program is running there is often a need to
get numbers or words from the outside world into the
computer so that it can do calculations on these numbers or
words. The statement INPUT is used for this purpose. There
are a number of options:
   100 INPUT X
will print a question mark on the screen and wait for the user
to type in a number – for example “7”. This is not very
“friendly” – often it would be helpful to print a message on the
screen before waiting for the user to type his/her reply. This
can be done in two ways
   340 PRINT "How old are you";
   350 INPUT AGE
or more simply
   340 INPUT "How old are you",AGE
If you do not wish the computer automatically to print a
question mark then omit the comma between the message to be
printed out and the variable to be filled in.
   340 INPUT "How old are you" AGE
Often you may want to input several values one after the other.
This can be done by placing the variables after each other, but
separated by commas, thus
   560 INPUT "Pick three numbers",X,Y,Z
When replying the user separates the values entered either
with commas or by pressing the RETURN key after entering
each value. The numbers that are typed in are placed in the
appropriate variables – X, Y and Z in the example above.
The above examples all required numbers to be supplied by the
user. INPUT can be used to get in words as well.
   205 INPUT "What is your name",NAME$
                              277
You can INPUT more than one string at a time if you wish by
using
   200 INPUT "Town",A$,"Country",B$
INPUT LINE A$ will accept everything that is typed in
including leading spaces and commas, and will place the lot
into A$.
Description
A statement to input values from the current input stream. The
question mark prompt may be suppressed by omitting the
comma following the prompt string. INPUT strips leading
spaces off strings.

Syntax
Too complicated for a useful yet simple description.

Associated keywords
INPUT#

                              278
                          put information into
INPUT#                    the computer from
                          cassette or disc

Purpose
It is possible to record data (numbers and words) on cassette or
floppy disc where they can be stored for later use. The
statement INPUT# is used to read the data back into the
computer from the cassette or disc. See the section on file
handling on page 188 for more information.

Example
 1200 INPUT#channel,date,name$,address$
 3400 INPUT#X,U,V,W$

Description
A statement which reads data in internal format from a file and
places the data in the stated variables.

Syntax
INPUT#<num-var>, <num–var>|<string-var>
{,<num-var>|<string-var>}

Associated keywords
OPENIN, OPENOUT, OPENUP, EXT#, PTR#,
PRINT#, BGET#, BPUT#, CLOSE#

                              279
INSTR in string
Purpose
To search one string for any occurrence of another string, for
example to see if one word contains another specific word.
The search normally starts from the beginning of one string but
as an option the search can start from a specified point along
the string.
The number returned is the string position of the second string
in the first string. The leftmost character position is position
number 1. If no match is found then zero is returned. A search
for a null string
X=INSTR("Sunday","") will always return 1.

Examples
   240 X=INSTR(A$,B$)
put the position of B$ in A$ into X
   180 Y=INSTR(A$,B$,Z)
start search at position Z.
PRINT INSTR("HELLO","L")
would print “3”

Description
A function which returns the position of a sub-string within a
string. The starting position for the search may be specified.
There must be no space between INSTR and the first bracket.

Syntax
<num-var> = INSTR(<string>,<string>[,
<numeric>])

                              280
Known problems
There is a known “bug” in release 1.0. If the second string is
longer than the first string, for example,
X=INSTR("A","KNOWN BUG")
then the function will appear to work but will corrupt the
stack. This bug is fatal if INSTR is used in procedures or functions.

Associated keywords
LEFT$, MID$, RIGHT$, LEN

                                281
INT integer part
Purpose
This converts a number with a decimal part to a whole number.
This function always returns a whole number smaller than the
number supplied. Thus INT(23.789) gives 23 whereas
INT(-13.3) returns -14.

Examples
   200 X=INT(Y)
 1050 wholenumber=INT(decimalnumber)
   330 pence=INT(cost * markup/quantity)

Description
INT is a function converting a real number to the lower
integer.

Syntax
<num-var> = INT(<numeric>)

                             282
LEFT$ left string
Purpose
To copy part of a string starting at the left-hand end of the
source string. For example if
A$="CATASTROPHE"
then
PRINT LEFT$(A$,3)
would give CAT, namely the left 3 characters of A$.

Examples
   100 INDEX$=LEFT$(WHOLEname$,4)
 3000 U$=LEFT$(H4$,value)

Description
A string function which returns the left n characters from a
string. If the source string is too short then the function returns
with as many characters as there are in the source string. There
must be no space between LEFT$ and the first bracket.

Syntax
<string-var>=LEFT$(<string>,<numeric>)

Associated keywords
RIGHT$, MID$, LEN, INSTR

Demonstration program
This prints out letters in a pattern
       10   PRINT "What is your full name";
       20   INPUT name$
       30   FOR X=1 TO LEN(name$)
       40   PRINT LEFT$(name$,X)
       50   NEXT X
>RUN

                                283
What   is your full name?JOHN A COLL
J
JO
JOH
JOHN
JOHN
JOHN   A
JOHN   A
JOHN   A   C
JOHN   A   CO
JOHN   A   COL
JOHN   A   COLL

                    284
LEN length (of a string)
Purpose
This function counts the number of characters in a string. For
example
K=LEN("FRIDAY ")
would give K=7 since there are six letters in "FRIDAY" and
it is followed by a space.
This function is often used with a FOR...NEXT loop to do
something once for each letter in a string. For example, we
might wish to encode a word by replacing each letter by its
successor in the alphabet so that, for example, "FRIDAY"
would becomes "GSJEBZ". See the demonstration program.

Examples
   100 X=LEN(A$)
 2350 length=LEN(main$)

Description
This function returns the length of the string given as the
argument.

Syntax
<num-var> = LEN(<string>)

Associated keywords
LEFT$, MID$, RIGHT$, INSTR

Demonstration program
   300    PRINT "Type in your word";
   310    INPUT A$
   320    length=LEN(A$)
   325    C$=""
   330    FOR V=1 TO length
   340    B$=MID$(A$,V,1)
   350    C$=C$+CHR$(ASC(B$)+1)
                               285
   360 NEXT V
   370 PRINT "The coded version is ";C$
In the above program each letter is copied one at a time into
B$. Then its ascii value is calculated, 1 is added to the ascii
value and the new ascii value is converted back into a
character which is then added onto C$. See the keyword ASC
on page 207 for more information about the ascii code.

                              286
LET
Purpose
In basic we often write things like
X=6
meaning put 6 into the box labelled X in the computer. The fact
that we are changing the contents of the variable X can be
made clearer by writing
LET X=6
The statement “X=X+6” is impossible in mathematical terms.
How can something be the same as itself plus 6? In basic
though it is quite legal to say LET X=X+6 since the
instruction simply means
“store in the variable X whatever is already there plus 6”; or
“increase the value of X by 6”.
The word LET is optional, but its use makes the program more
readable.

Examples
   100 LET length=15
   980 LET DAY$="Tuesday"
   210 IF A=6 THEN LET A=A+10
 1000 IF length<12 THEN LET length=12

Description
LET is an optional assignment statement.
Note: LET may not be used during the assignment of the
psuedo-variables LOMEM, HIMEM, PAGE, PTR#, TIME

Syntax
LET <var> = <expression>

                               287
LIST
Purpose
This command makes the computer list out whatever program
it has in its memory. It is often used before typing RUN to
ensure that there aren’t any typing errors in the program just
entered.
You can list a single line
LIST 280
or a range of lines
LIST 100,450
or the whole program
LIST
LIST ,400 will list all lines up to and including line 400.
LIST 400, will list all lines beyond line 400.
If you have a very long program you may see the whole listing
whiz past before you have time to read it. To stop that, and to
make the computer stop at the bottom of each page you can
type CTRL N (whilst holding down the key marked CTRL
press the letter N). Then type LIST. This is called “paging
mode” and the computer stops at the bottom of each page. The
next page will be printed when the SHIFT key is pressed.
To return to “scroll mode” type CTRL O (hold CTRL down
while briefly pressing the letter O).
Pressing SHIFT and CTRL together holds the listing until they
are released.
Pressing ESCAPE stops the listing.
If you want a listing on the printer then you can turn the
printer on by typing CTRL B before typing LIST.
To turn the printer off afterwards type CTRL C.

                              288
LIST is a command and cannot be used as part of a program
or as part of a multiple statement line.
The layout of programs as listed can be controlled by the
command LISTO (see next entry). As an option, the computer
can be instructed to insert spaces for the duration of all
FOR...NEXT and REPEAT...UNTIL loops.
Examples
LIST
LIST 400
LIST 400,500
LIST ,900
LIST 900,

Description
A command which lists the current program.

Syntax
LIST [<num-const>[,]<num-const>]

Associated keywords
NEW, OLD, LISTO

                            289
LISTO list option
Purpose
When a program is listed on the screen or the printer, it is often
convenient to show all loops within the program indented.
LISTO can be used to control the way that the LIST
command displays a program on the screen. It can cause the
computer to insert spaces in three situations
a after the line number
b during FOR...NEXT loops
c during REPEAT...UNTIL loops
The number following LISTO should be in the range 0 to 7.
0 implies no inserted spaces
1 implies a space after the line number
2 implies spaces during FOR...NEXT loops
4 implies spaces during REPEAT...UNTIL loops
The numbers which select each option (1,2 or 4) can be added
together to select multiple options. If spaces were required
during FOR...NEXT and REPEAT...UNTIL loops then
LISTO 6 would be selected. LISTO 7 puts a space after the
line number and double spaces for FOR...NEXT and
REPEAT...UNTIL loops.
The most common options are LISTO 0 and LISTO 7.
When editing programs using the cursor editing keys it is
strongly advised that you use the LISTO 0 option or else you
will COPY in a lot of extra space.
Description
LISTO affects the print format produced by subsequent
LIST commands. Bit 0 of the argument controls the single
space after the line number; Bit 1 the double space on
FOR...NEXT loops; Bit 2 the double space on
REPEAT...UNTIL loops.
Syntax
LISTO <num–const>
Associated keywords
LIST

                               290
LN natural logarithm
Purpose
A mathematical function to calculate logarithms to the base e –
usually called “natural logarithms”.

Examples
   100 X=LN(temp)
 3000 H5=LN(REDOXpotential)

Description
A function returning the natural logarithm of its argument.

Syntax
<num-var> = LN(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
LOG, EXP

                              291
LOAD
Purpose
To load a program into the computer from cassette tape, floppy
disc or the network, whichever is the current file system.
A welcome cassette containing some games is provided with
the computer and these games can be loaded into the computer
with the keyword LOAD. If you have problems loading a
program then see page 34. The keyword LOAD is followed by
the ‘file name’. This file name may contain up to 10 characters
and must be enclosed in quotation marks, e.g.
LOAD "GAME1"
Once the program has been loaded, type RUN to start it.
When you use the word LOAD, the computer forgets any
previous program that it had in memory and also the values of
all variables.
If you are loading from cassette, then the computer will show
the name of each section of the program as it finds it on the
cassette.
LOAD does not run a program. It just loads it into memory. It
clears all variables except A% to Z% and @%. It cannot be used
in a program.
LOAD"" will load the next program found on a tape. This
form does not work on disc or net or other file systems.
The statement CHAIN can be used in a program (or as a
command) to load another program and to start that program
running automatically.

Examples
LOAD "STARWARS"
LOAD "MYPROG"

                             292
Description
The command LOAD deletes the current program, clears all
variables except the resident integer variables and then loads a
new program from the current file system. The program to be
loaded must be in internal format.
Since LOAD is a command it cannot form part of a multiple
statement line.

Syntax
LOAD <string>

Associated keywords
SAVE, CHAIN

                              293
LOCAL
Purpose
This informs the computer that the named variables are “local”
to the procedure or function in which they occur; their use in
this procedure or function in no way affects their value outside
it. See the keyword DEF on page 230 for more information.

Example
   560 LOCAL X,Y,A$,B$

Description
A statement which can only be used inside a procedure or
function definition. LOCAL saves the values of the external
variables named and restores these original values when the
function or procedure is completed.

Syntax
LOCAL <string-var>|<num-var>{,
<string-var>|<num-var>}

Demonstration program
   780    DEF PROCdrawTRIANGLE(size)
   790    LOCAL X1,X2,Y1,Y2
   800    X1=320-size
   810    X2=320+size
   820    Y1=256-size
   830    Y2=256+size
   840    MOVE X1,Y1
   850    DRAW X2,Y1
   860    DRAW 320,Y2
   870    DRAW X1,Y1
   880    ENDPROC

Associated keywords
DEF, ENDPROC, FN, PROC

                              294
LOG logarithm
Purpose
A mathematical function to calculate the common logarithm of
a number to base 10.

Examples
   100 Y=LOG(y)
   440 pressure=LOG(speed)

Description
A function giving the common logarithm to base 10 of its
argument. Inverse logarithms (anti-logarithms) can be
calculated by using
Y=10^X

Syntax
<num-var> = LOG(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
LN, EXP

                             295
LOMEM lowest memory location
Purpose
Different sections of the computer’s memory are used for
different purposes. Normally basic makes an intelligent
decision about where to store the numbers that the user calls X
and Y$ etc. In fact it stores these variables immediately after
the user’s program. You can change the place where it starts to
store these variables by changing the value of LOMEM.
The variable LOMEM gives the address of the place in memory
above which the computer stores all its variables (except for the
resident integer variables @% and A% to Z%.
LOMEM is normally set to be the same as TOP which is the
address of the top of the user program. See the keyword
HIMEM on page 270 and the memory map on page 500 for
more details.
Do not accidentally move LOMEM in the middle of a program –
the interpreter will lose track of all the variables that you are
using.

Examples
   100 LOMEM=TOP+&100
PRINT LOMEM
PRINT~LOMEM
NB The ~ tells the computer to print the value in hexadecimal.

Description
A pseudo-variable which sets the place in memory above
which the basic interpreter stores dynamic variables – those
that are created and destroyed as required. Space is always set
aside for the “resident variables” @% to Z%. Normally LOMEM
is set equal to TOP which contains the address of the end of the
user program.
Moving LOMEM in the middle of a program will cause loss of
all variables.
                              296
Syntax
LOMEM = <numeric>
or
<num-var> = LOMEM

Associated keywords
HIMEM, TOP, PAGE

                      297
MID$ middle string
Purpose
To copy part of one string into another string. For example if
demo$="DOGMATIC"
then the middle part of demo$, starting at position 4 and
going on for 3 letters i.e.
MID$(demo$,4,3)
would equal MAT. In fact MID$ can be used to copy any part
of a string – not just the middle part. Thus
MID$(demo$,1,3) would equal DOG and
MID$(demo$,5,4) would be ATIC
This string-function is very useful for selecting one word out of
a long line. There is a demonstration program on page 266
under the keyword GOSUB and another under the keyword
LEN on page 285.
If the last number is omitted then the function returns with the
rest of the string.
Example
RESTofLINE$=MID$(main$,10)
Description
A string function which returns a subsection of the first
argument’s string. The second argument gives the starting
position and the third argument gives the number of characters
to be copied. If the source string is too short then the function
returns as many characters as possible forwards from the
starting position.
Syntax
<string var>=MID$(<string>,<numeric>[,
<numeric>])

Associated keywords
LEFT$, RIGHT$, LEN, INSTR
                              298
MOD modulus
Purpose
The function MOD gives the remainder after division. When
doing division with whole numbers (I emphasise – with whole
numbers) it is sometimes useful to know the remainder. For
example 14 divided by 5 leaves a remainder of 4 (14=2*5+4).
Similarly
PRINT 14 MOD 5
would print 4. The whole number part of the above division is
given by the function DIV. Thus
PRINT 14 DIV 5
would print 2.
Notice that the result of both DIV and MOD is always a whole
number.
In fact all numbers used in the calculation of the function are
first converted to integers (using internal truncation) before the
computer calculates the result. Thus
14      DIV      5=2
14.6    DIV      5.1=2
14      MOD      5=4
14.6    MOD      5.1=4
The second example (14.6 DIV 5.1) is really the same as
the first. However.
14.6 DIV 4.9=3 and
14.6 MOD 4.9=2
are quite different. In effect the computer sees them as
14      DIV 4=3
14      MOD 4=2

                               299
Examples
   100 LET X=A MOD B
PRINT length MOD 12

Description
A binary operation giving the signed remainder of an integer
division. MOD is defined such that
A MOD B = A-((A DIV B)*B)

Syntax
<num-var> = <numeric> MOD <numeric>

Associated keywords
DIV

                             300
MODE graphics mode
Purpose
This statement is used to select which display mode the
computer is about to use. On the Model A computer display
modes 4, 5, 6 and 7 may be selected. On the Model B all display
modes are available. Changing modes clears the screen.
Mode     Graphics          Colours                 Text
0        640´256           2 colour display        80´32 text
1        320´256           4 colour display        40´32 text
2        160´256           16 colour display       20´32 text
3                          2 colour text only      80´25 text
4        320´256           2 colour display        40´32 text
5        160´256           4 colour display        20´32 text
6                          2 colour text only      40´25 text
7                          Teletext display        40´25 text
MODE 7 uses the Teletext standard display characters. These
cannot be changed by the user. Since these characters differ
slightly from the standard ascii set you will find that a number
of characters on the screen do not correspond to those printed
on the keys. For example a left hand square bracket will be
displayed as an arrow.
In modes 0 to 6 the character set can be changed by the user.
See VDU 23 on page 384.
You cannot change mode inside a procedure or function.

Examples
   10 MODE 5
MODE 7

Description
A statement used to select the display mode which may not be
used in a procedure or function. MODE resets the value of
HIMEM.

                              301
Syntax
MODE <numeric>

Associated keywords
CLS, CLG, HIMEM

                      302
MOVE
Purpose
This statement moves the graphics cursor to a particular
absolute position without drawing a line. For example to move
to a point 100 points across the screen and 300 points up the
screen one would say
MOVE 100,300

Examples
 1050 MOVE 100,300
MOVE X,Y

Description
To move the graphics cursor to a new position without
drawing a line. This statement is identical to PLOT 4.

Syntax
MOVE <numeric>,<numeric>

Associated keywords
DRAW, MODE, GCOL, PLOT

                             303
NEW
Purpose
To “remove” a program from the computer’s memory. In fact
the program is still there but the computer has been told to
forget about it. If you want to, you can usually recover the old
program by typing OLD. This only works if you have not
entered any part of another program.
NEW is normally used as a command before typing in a new
program – to ensure that the computer has forgotten all its
previous instructions.
NEW does not clear any of the resident integer variables A% to
Z% or @%.

Example
NEW

Description
A command which resets internal pointers to “delete” all
program statements. The program may be recovered with OLD
provided no new statements have been entered and no new
variables have been created. Since it is a command it cannot
form part of a multiple statements line.

Syntax
NEW

Associated keywords
OLD

                               304
NEXT
Purpose
This is used in conjunction with FOR to make the computer
loop around a set of statements a number of times.
If the loop is opened with (for example)
FOR speed=10 TO 100
then the NEXT statement would normally be in the form
NEXT speed
but the word “speed” is optional.

Example
   340    length=100
   350    FOR X=0 TO 640 STEP 2
   360    Y=2*length+250
   370    DRAW X,Y
   380    NEXT

Description
A statement delimiting FOR...NEXT loops. The control
variable (X in the last example) is optional.
If a variable is given after NEXT then the computer will “pop”
other FOR...NEXT loops off the “stack” until it finds a
matching variable. If none is found, an error will be reported.

Syntax
NEXT [<num-var>]

Associated keywords
FOR, TO, STEP

                              305
NOT
Purpose
This is normally used with an IF...THEN statement to
reverse the effect of some test.

Example
  680 IF NOT (A=6 AND B=5) THEN PRINT
"WRONG"
If A=6 and B=5 then the computer will not print WRONG.

Description
NOT is a high priority unary operator equivalent to unary
minus.

Syntax
<num-var> = NOT <numeric>
or
<testable condition> = NOT (<testable
condition>)

                             306
OLD
Purpose
To recover a program which has been recently deleted by NEW
or by pressing the BREAK key. Programs can only be recovered
if no program lines have been entered and if no new variables
have been created since the program was deleted. If you get the
message Bad program, then type NEW again.
Typing NEW or pressing BREAK are quite drastic moves. OLD
will do its best to recover your program but will not always
succeed fully. In particular if the first line number in your
program is greater than 255 then it will get that one line
number wrong. The ESCAPE key provides a clean and tidy
method of stopping a program. BREAK is much more violent
and should be avoided.

Example
OLD

Description
A command which undoes the effect of NEW.

Syntax
OLD

Associated keywords
NEW

                             307
ON
Purpose
To alter the order in which basic executes a program by
jumping to one of a selection of lines depending on the value of
a particular variable. The word ON is used with three other
keywords GOTO, GOSUB and ERROR. For example
ON   value GOTO 800,920,100,1170,7300
ON   result GOSUB 8000,8300,120,7600
ON   ERROR GOTO 9000
ON   ERROR GOSUB 2001
First:
ON X GOTO 1100,1210,1450,1600,1950
If the value X is equal to 1 then the program will go to line
1100. If X=2 then the program will go to line 1210. If X=3 then
line 1450 and so on.
What is it used for? Suppose that you are counting coins put
into a machine and you want to offer different things if 1, 2 or 3
coins are put in. The program which follows illustrates, in
outline, how ON GOTO will help.
  450 REM the variable COINS gives the
number
  460 REM of coins inserted
  500 ON COINS GOTO 550,600,650
  550 PRINT "One coin buys a biscuit"
  560 REM give him a biscuit somehow
  590 GOTO 1000
  600 PRINT "Two coins can buy tea or
coffee"
  610 GOTO 1000
  650 PRINT "Three coins can buy a
piece of cake"
  660 REM something else in here as
well
  690 GOTO 1000
 1000 REM all the routines end up here
                               308
Secondly:
ON X GOSUB 2200,2300,2400,2500
ON can also be used with GOSUB instead of GOTO. See the
page describing GOSUB for an explanation of subroutines.
ON X GOSUB provides a neat way of using different
subroutines in different situations.
Note: An ELSE clause can be included at the end of ON GOTO
and ON GOSUB to trap out-of-range values without causing an
error. Unfortunately this facility upsets returning from
functions and procedures in the first version of basic.
Thirdly:
ON ERROR GOTO
ON ERROR OFF
If the computer detects an error in your program or in the disc
drives or anything else that it can’t cope with, then it “produces
an error”. In other words it complains and stops. The
complaint takes the form of a message on the screen – for
example Too big.
Sometimes it is vital that the computer looks after such
situations without troubling the user. The statement
ON ERROR GOTO 7000 ensures that if an error occurs the
computer does not complain and does not stop. Instead it goes
to a piece of program at line 7000 (in this case) which has been
specially written to get the computer out of the mess it is in.
This section of program may have to give the user instructions
like “Please enter a smaller number” or it may be able to sort
out the problem in some other way.
How well this “error trapping” works depends on the skill of
the programmer in thinking of every possible thing that can go
wrong. You will soon re-discover Murphy’s Law:
“If a thing can go wrong, it will.”
Good error handling is vital in all programs for use by
non-specialists – and that means most people!
The statement ON ERROR OFF lets the computer deal with
errors once again – cancelling the effect of ON ERROR GOTO.

                               309
Examples
   40 ON ERROR GOTO 9000
  50 ON ERROR PRINT "The computer is
confused"
   10 ON ERROR GOSUB 2000

Description
A statement providing multiple options in changing the order
of execution of a program, and error trapping

Syntax
ON <num-var> GOTO<numeric>{,<numeric>}
or
ON <num-var> GOSUB<numeric>{,<numeric>}
or
ON ERROR <statement>
or
ON ERROR OFF

Associated keywords
GOTO, GOSUB

                             310
                               open file for input to
OPENIN                         computer (from
                               cassette or disc)

Purpose
To tell the computer that your program wishes to read data
(words and numbers) from the cassette or disc. Reading data in
from cassette or disc is quite a complicated procedure for the
computer and it needs advance warning when you wish to do
so. The advance warning is given by the OPENIN keyword.
One use of this facility is to store names and addresses on “file”
(i.e. the cassette or disc) and to read the file in each time you
want to update it. After you have corrected it you can then
transfer it back to cassette or disc where it will be saved for
future use. Further information about cassette, disc and
network “files” is provided on page 188.
A typical example of the use of OPENIN is
X=OPENIN("cinemas")
This informs the computer that you will shortly want to read
data in from a file which is recorded on cassette or disc under
the name “cinemas”. The “filename” is “cinemas”.
In accepting this instruction the computer allocates a “channel”
to this operation. It is as if it said “O.K. that information will be
provided on telephone number 6”. It makes X=6 (or whatever
number it decides). In all future operations on that file you
must refer to it as channel X (channel 6 in this example).
You get the actual data into the computer (from the cassette) by
using INPUT#X as the demonstration program on the next
page indicates.
Example
   230 file=OPENIN("census")
Description
A function which attempts to open a file for input or random
access. In a disc or network environment then if a file already
exists with the correct name it will be opened for updating
(reading or writing).

                                311
The function returns the channel number allocated by the
computer’s file system. If the file does not exist then zero is
returned.

Syntax
<num-var> = OPENIN(<string>)

Associated keywords
OPENOUT, OPENUP, EXT#, PTR#, INPUT#,
PRINT#, BGET#, BPUT#, EOF#, CLOSE#

Demonstration program
   10 REM to read in the names of 10
cinemas from
   20 REM cassette assuming of course
that you put
   30 REM them there sometime before!
   50 REM dimension a string array of
10 slots
   60 DIM cine$(10)
   90 REM open the file
  100 channel=OPENIN("CINEMA")
  110 REM and read in the ten cinema
names
  120 FOR X=1 TO 10
  130 INPUT# channel,cine$(X)
  140 NEXT X
  150 REM that’s the information in
  160 REM do whatever you want with it!

OPENUP open file for update
See page 513 for details.

                                312
                                       open file for
OPENOUT                                output to
                                       cassette or disc

Purpose
This opens a cassette or disc file for output. Before you can
record data (rather than programs) onto a cassette you have to
“open a file”. More information about “files” is given on page
188.
OPENOUT is used to inform the computer that you wish to
record data on cassette or disc. The computer allocates a
channel to the operation.
When working with discs or over the network then if a file
already exists with that name it will be deleted. If no file exists
then a new one will be created.

Example
   330 X=OPENOUT("cinemas")

Description
A function which returns the channel number allocated to an
output file.
If a file of the same name exists then that file will first be
deleted. If no file exists then one will be created.

Syntax
<num-var> = OPENOUT(<string>)

Associated keywords
OPENIN, OPENUP, PTR#, EXT#, INPUT#,
PRINT#, BGET#, BPUT#, EOF#, CLOSE#

                                 313
OPT option
Purpose
This statement determines what output is produced on the
screen when assembly language routines are processed by the
basic interpreter. An understanding of the operation of
assemblers is required to understand the following.
During assembly two common errors can occur: “Branch out of
range” and “Unknown label”.
The latter will occur during pass one for all forward references.
It is therefore often desirable to turn off assembler error
messages during pass one.
The statement OPT is followed by a number in the range 0 to 7,
with the following results:
0   assembler errors suppressed, no listing
1   assembler errors suppressed, listing
2   assembler errors reported, no listing
3   assembler errors reported, listing
Options 4, 5, 6 and 7 behave exactly as options 0, 1, 2 and 3
except that the code can be placed at a different location from
that at which it is intended to execute. With options 4 to 7 the
variable P% controls the program counter during assembly,
and the variable O% gives the memory location where the
code is placed.
The OPT statement can only occur inside the square brackets
which enclose a piece of assembly language. OPT is set to 3
every time the basic interpreter finds a [. Do not confuse it
with *OPT which is described on page 434.

Examples
    200 OPT 1
    350 OPT (pass*2+list)

                               314
Description
An assembler pseudo-operation controlling the output during
assembly. OPT is followed by an expression as detailed above.

Syntax
OPT <numeric>

Demonstration program
    10    oswrch=&FFEE
    20    DIM memory% 100
    30    FOR Z=0 TO 3 STEP 3
    35    P%=memory%
    40    [OPTZ
    50    .start LDA#ASC"!"
    60    LDX #40
    70    .loop JSR oswrch
    80    dex:BNE loop
    90    rts:] NEXT Z
   100    CALL start
   110    END

OSCLI command line interpreter
See page 514 for details.

Description
A statement which passes its string argument to the operating
system command line interpreter.

Syntax
OSCLI<string>

Associated keywords
STR$, CHR$

                             315
OR
Purpose
To enable one condition or another condition to determine
what happens next.
The OR operator can be used either as a “logical or” or as a
“bitwise or”. See the keyword AND on page 205 for details of
logical and bitwise operators.

Example
   75 IF X=6 OR date>20 THEN PRINT
"Good"

Description
An operator performing bitwise integer logical OR between
two numerics.

Syntax
<num-var> = <numeric> OR <numeric>

Associated keywords
AND, EOR, NOT

                             316
PAGE
Purpose
PAGE is a variable which gives the address in memory where
basic has stored (or will store) the user’s program. This is
usually automatically set to be the lowest available address in
the computer’s Random Access Memory but can be changed by
the user.
PAGE can be used to enable the computer to store two
different programs at the same time in different areas of
memory. Use with care.

Examples
PRINT PAGE
     10 PAGE=&5000
     20 PRINT ~PAGE
   235 PAGE=TOP+1000

Description
A pseudo-variable giving the address used by the interpreter
for the start of the user program. The least significant byte of
PAGE is always set to zero by the computer. In other words
user programs always start on a “page” boundary where one
page is 100 bytes hex (256 bytes decimal).

Syntax
PAGE = <numeric>
or
<num-var> = PAGE

Associated keywords
TOP, LOMEM, HIMEM

                               317
PI
Purpose
PI has the value 3.14159265. It is used in the example to
calculate the area of a circle radius R.

Examples
   100 AREA=PI*R^2
PRINT PI

Description
PI=3.14159265

Syntax
<num-var> = PI

                              318
PLOT
Purpose
PLOT is the multi-purpose point, line and triangle drawing
statement in basic.
The first number which follows the keyword PLOT tells the
computer what kind of point, line or triangle it is going to
draw. The two following numbers give the X and Y
co-ordinates to be used in plotting the point or drawing the line
or triangle.
PLOT K,X,Y plots to the point at X, Y in a manner
determined by the value of K. The effect of each value of K will
be:
0      move relative to last point
1      draw line relative in the current graphics foreground
       colour
2      draw line relative in the logical inverse colour
3      draw line relative in current graphics background
       colour
4      move to absolute position
5      draw line absolute in the current graphics foreground
       colour
6      draw line absolute in logical inverse colour
7      draw line absolute in current graphics background
       colour
Higher values of K have other effects which are related to the
effects given by the values 0 to 7
8-15   as 0-7 but with the last point in the line omitted in
       inverting actions’ – eg using GCOL 4
16-23 as 0-7 but with a dotted line

                               319
24-31 as 0-7 but with a dotted line and without the last point
      on the line
32-63 are reserved for the Graphics Extension rom
64-71 as 0-7 but only a single point is plotted
72-79 as 0-7 but plot points left and right from the given
      coordinates until a non-background colour is reached
80-87 as 0-7 but plot and fill a triangle. When filling solid
      triangles with colour the computer fills the triangle
      between the coordinates given and the last two points
      visited.
88-95 as 0-7 but plot points to the right from the given
      coordinates until the background colour is reached
96-255 reserved for future expansions.
See the vdu driver section of the User Guide on page 377 for an
alternative interpretation of the numbers given above.
Suppose that in the above example PLOT K,X,Y the value of
X was 50 and the value of Y was 80 then
“Draw line relative” would mean: draw a line to the point on
the screen 50 places to the right of the origin and 80 places up
from the origin.
“Logical Inverse Colour” is explained next.
In two-colour modes the logical inverse colour of logical colour
0 is logical colour 1.
In four colour modes the following apply
              logical    inverse
                 0          3
                 1          2
                 2          1
                 3          0
In the sixteen colour mode logical colour 0 becomes 15, logical
colour 1 becomes 14 and so on.
When drawing lines the computer draws a line from the last
point to the X,Y position given.

                                320
Normally the origin is set at the bottom left of the screen, but
its position may be moved to any point by using the VDU 29
statement. See page 388 for more information.
The graphics screen is 1280 points (0-1279) wide and 1024
(0-1023) points high.
The most commonly used PLOT statements are PLOT 4, and
PLOT 5, so these two have been given duplicate keywords;
MOVE and DRAW.
To print a string at a specific place on the screen use the
TAB(X,Y) statement. As an alternative one can join the
graphics and text cursors together with the statement VDU 5 so
that the computer prints text at the graphics cursor position.
Once that has been done then the graphics cursor can be
moved with MOVE, DRAW and PLOT statements.

Examples
   100 PLOT 3,X,Y
PLOT 6,100,220

Description
A statement controlling the generation of points, lines and
triangles on the screen.

Syntax
PLOT <numeric>,<numeric>,<numeric>

Associated keywords
MODE, CLG, MOVE, DRAW, POINT, VDU, GCOL

                               321
POINT
Purpose
To find out the colour of a certain position on the screen.
Suppose that you are playing a game involving moving a car
around a race track. On the race track are pools of green oil. To
find out if the place where your car is about to move to has oil
on it (so that the car will skid) you need to be able to find out if
the screen is coloured green at that point.
The number returned is the logical colour of the screen at the
graphic point specified. If the selected point is off the screen
then the number returned will be –1. There must not be a space
between the word POINT and the opening bracket.

Examples
 1340 colour=POINT(X,Y)
  100 IF POINT(X,Y)=2 THEN PRINT
"SKID!!"

Description
A function returning a number representing the colour on the
screen at the specified co-ordinates. If the point is off the screen
then the function returns –1.

Syntax
<num–var> = POINT(<numeric>,<numeric>)

Associated keywords
PLOT, DRAW, MOVE, GCOL

                                322
POS position
Purpose
This function finds out how far across the screen the flashing
cursor is. The left hand side of the screen is position 0 and the
right hand side is position 19, 39 or 79 depending on the MODE
that has been selected.

Examples
 1005 X=POS
   320 distance=POS

Description
A function returning the horizontal position of the cursor in the
current text window.

Syntax
<num-var> = POS

Associated keywords
COUNT, TAB, VPOS

Demonstration program
To print spaces on the screen up to a certain horizontal position
– for example to align columns
   100 column=12
   110 REPEAT PRINT" ";
   120 UNTIL POS=column

                               323
PRINT
Purpose
This does not print anything on paper. It does, however, print
words and numbers on the screen.
Anything enclosed in inverted commas will be “printed”
exactly as it is.
Things not enclosed in inverted commas will be assumed to be
variable names and the contents of the variable will be printed
out. The exact layout of the numbers and figures on the screen
will depend on the punctuation used in the PRINT statement.
The items following the word PRINT are referred to as the
“print list”.
The screen behaves as if it is divided into vertical strips (or
fields) which are (initially) 10 characters wide.
A comma after an item in the print list will cause enough
spaces to be printed to ensure that the next item will be printed
in the next field.
A semi-colon after an item in the print list will cause the next
item to be printed on the same line and immediately following
the previous item.
If the print list does not end with a semi-colon then the next
PRINT statement will print its output on a new line.
PRINT by itself leaves a blank line. A new line can be forced
at any stage in the print list by inserting an apostrophe.
PRINT ~ followed by a numeric argument prints that
argument in hexadecimal.
The table below gives examples as they would appear, except
that commas have been inserted where spaces would be – to
aid counting.

                                324
Example
                             Print position
                             12345678901234567890
PRINT 1,2                    ,,,,,,,,,1,,,,,,,,,2
PRINT 10,200                 ,,,,,,,,10,,,,,,,200
PRINT;10;200                 10200
PRINT
PRINT "Answer";A Answer42
PRINT "Answer"A              Answer,,,,,,,,42
PRINT "Answer",A Answer,,,,,,,,,,,,42
PRINT 1/2                    ,,,,,,,0.5
PRINT 1/3                    0.333333333
PRINT 3.3'2.25               ,,,,,,,3.3
                             ,,,,,,2.25
The printer can be turned on at any time by typing CTRL B or
by the statement VDU 2 in a program. The output of all PRINT
statements will then appear on the printer as well as the screen.
CTRL C turns the printer output off. See page 404 for more
information about the printer.
Considerable flexibility has been built into the interpreter to
enable it to print numbers in several different layouts. There is
no need to learn to use these options at first but they will be
invaluable when layout is crucial. A more detailed explanation
of the advanced features is given below.
It is possible to control the overall field width, the total number
of figures printed and the number of decimal places printed.
All these features are set with one variable called @%.
In brief, setting
@%=131594 will give 2 decimal places
@%=131850 will give 3 decimal places
@%=10 will return to the normal output format.

                               325
For a detailed understanding of the format it is best to consider
@% as a four byte number (e.g. @=&01020903) each byte
controlling one aspect of the print format. The most significant
byte will be called B4. It has a value of 01 in the example above.
The least significant byte is called B1 and has the value 03 in
the example above.
B4 is tested by the function STR$ to determine the format of
strings created by that function. If B4=01 then strings will be
formatted paying attention to the setting of @% otherwise @%
will be ignored by STR$. Initially B4=00.
B3 selects the basic format thus
00 General format (G format)
01 Exponent format (E format)
02 Fixed format (F format)
In G format numbers that are integers will be printed as
integers. Numbers in the range 0.1 to 1 will be printed as 0.1
etc. Numbers less than 0.1 will be printed in exponent format.
Exponent format will always print numbers in scientific
notation; 100 becomes 1E2, 1000 becomes 1E3 and 1200
becomes 1.2E3.
Fixed format prints numbers with a fixed number of decimal
places. If the number cannot be fitted into the selected field
width it reverts to G format. The decimal points are aligned
vertically which is ideal for scientific and accounting programs.
B2 controls the total number of digits printed in the selected
format. If B2 is too large or too small for the mode selected then
B2 is taken as 9. The number is rounded to fit in the B2 digit
field.
In G format B2 gives the maximum number of digits that can
be printed before reverting to E format. Range 1-9.
In E format B2 specifies the total number of digits to be printed
before and after the decimal point – but not counting the digits
after the E. Another way of looking at it is to say that (B2-1)
digits will follow the decimal point. In E format 3 characters or
spaces always follow the final E. Range of B2 in E format is 1-9.

                               326
In F format B2 specifies the number of digits to follow the
decimal point. Range 0-9.
B1 sets the overall print field width and may have any value in
the range 0 to 255 which in hexadecimal is &00 to &FF.
For example accounting purposes would often require fixed
format 2 decimal places and 10 character field width.
The four bytes of @% are built up thus
@% = &                00 00 00 00
B4 – zero             00
B3 – fixed format        02
B2 – 2 decimal places       02
B1 – character field           0A
so @%=&0002020A the “&” indicating that the number is in
hexadecimal. You can, of course, omit the leading zeros.
Here are some other formats:
 format   (G2)            (G9)          (F2)         (E2)
@%=&    0000020A        0000090A      0002020A     0001020A
100          1E2             100        100.00       1.0E2
 10            10              10        10.00       1.0E1
  1             1               1         1.00       1.0E0
  0.1        0.1             0.1          0.10       1.0E-1
  0.01      1E-2            1E-2          0.01       1.0E-2
  0.005     5E-3            5E-3          0.01       5.0E-3
  0.001     1E-3            1E-3          0.00       1.0E-3
  0             0               0         0.00       0.0E0
-10          -10             -10        -10.00      -1.0E1

Description
A statement causing numeric and string values printed on the
screen.

Syntax
PRINT {['][,|;]<string>|<numeric>}['][;]

Associated keywords
PRINT#, TAB, POS, STR$, WIDTH, INPUT,
VDU

                               327
PRINT#
Purpose
This records numbers and words on cassette or disc. In other
words it stores data on a file. Numbers and strings are stored in
a special internal format. Before this statement is used the file
must have been opened using the OPENIN or OPENOUT
statements. See the section on files on page 188 for more
information.

Example
PRINT# file, X,Y,Z,A$,"Monday",33

Description
A statement which writes data to files. All values are written in
a special internal format:
Integer variables are written as &40 followed by the two’s
complement representation of the integer in four bytes, most
significant byte first.
Real variables are written as &FF followed by four bytes of
mantissa and one byte exponent. The mantissa is sent lowest
significant bit (lsb) first. 31 bits represent the magnitude of the
mantissa and 1 bit the sign. The exponent byte is in two’s
complement excess 128 form.
String variables are written as &00 followed by a 1 byte “byte
count” followed by the characters in the string in reverse order.

Syntax
PRINT#<num-var>{,<numeric>|<string>}

Associated keywords
OPENIN, OPENOUT, OPENUP, EXT#, PTR#,
INPUT#, BGET#, BPUT#, CLOSE#

                                328
PROC procedure
Purpose
This is used as the first part of a name to indicate that it refers
to a procedure. See the keyword DEF on page 230 for a fuller
description.

Example
    10 DEF PROChello(X)
    20 LOCAL Z
    30 FOR Z=0 TO X
    40 PRINT "Hello - how about this for
BASIC!"
    50 NEXT Z
    60 ENDPROC
Description
A reserved word used at the start of all user declared
procedures. There must not be a space between PROC and the
rest of the procedure name.
Syntax
PROC<variable-name>[(<string-var>|
<num-var>{,<string-var>|<num-var>})]

Associated keywords
DEF, ENDPROC, LOCAL
Demonstration program
   10 REM Tower of Hanoi problem
   20 INPUT "Number of disks",F
   30 PROChanoi(F,1,2,3)
   40 END
   50 DEF PROChanoi(A,B,C,D) IF A=0
ENDPROC
   60 PROChanoi(A-1,B,D,C)
   70 PRINT "Move disk " ;A; " from
pile " ;B; " to pile " ;C
   80 PROChanoi(A-1,D,C,B)
   90 ENDPROC
                                329
PTR# pointer
Purpose
This statement is not available on cassette based systems. It
selects which item in a long file is to be read or written next.
Strings and numbers are stored in a long line one after the
other. Each integer number occupies 5 bytes, each real number
occupies 6 bytes and each string takes up the number of letters
in the string plus 2. See the entry PRINT# on page 328 for
more details of the file format. The file-pointer can be moved
up and down the file to point to any selected word or number.
Note that you have to keep a careful track of where each word
or number starts to use the function. The number immediately
following the keyword PTR# is the channel number allocated
to the file when it was opened. A file must be open on the
selected channel before this function is used. Files are opened
with the OPENIN and OPENOUT statements. See page 188 for
more information on file handling.

Examples
PRINT PTR#X
   560 PTR#file=PTR#file+80
    85 PTR#channel=0

Description
A statement and function which allows the programmer to
move a pointer to a serial file and thus enables random access.

Syntax
<num–var> = PTR#<num–var>
or
PTR#<num-var> = <numeric>

Associated keywords
INPUT#, PRINT#, BGET#, BPUT#, OPENIN,
OPENOUT, OPENUP, EXT#, EOF#

                              330
RAD radian
Purpose
To convert an angle measured in degrees to radians. 1 radian
equals approximately 57 degrees.

Examples
 1030 X=RAD(Y)
PRINT RAD(45)

Description
A function converting an angular argument given in degrees to
radian measure.

Syntax
<num-var> = RAD(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
DEG

                             331
READ
Purpose
To enable numbers or words that are required in a program to
be made available every time the program is run. It does this
by reading numbers or words into numeric or string variables
from DATA statements in the program. Most often the data is
read into an array. See the keyword DIM on page 120 for more
information on arrays.
See the keyword DATA on page 227 for a more detailed
description.

Example
   100 READ name$(X),A

Description
A statement which copies the next item from a data-list into the
variable or variables which follow the keyword READ. The
DATA must contain the correct sequence of string and numeric
data for the string and numeric variables to be assigned. In
other words numeric data must be supplied if a numeric
variable is to be filled.

Syntax
READ <num-var>|<string var>{,<num-var>|
<string–var>}

Associated keywords
DATA, RESTORE

                              332
Demonstration programe
  200 INPUT "How many pounds can you
afford" ,AFFORD
  210 PRINT "You can afford the
following cars"
  220 FOR X=1 TO 10
  230 READ NAME$
  240 READ PRICE
  250 IF PRICE < AFFORD THEN PRINT
NAME$
  260 NEXT
  270 END
  500 REM British Leyland Cars
  510 DATA METRO HLE,3695
  520 DATA etc etc

                         333
REM remark
Purpose
To enable the program writer to put remarks and comments
into the program to help him remember what the various parts
of the program do. The computer completely ignores anything
that appears after a REM.
When you first start writing small programs you can get away
with having no REMs, but as your programs grow in
complexity you will find it quite essential to have them liberally
sprinkled over your program. If you come back to a program
six months after you wrote it and find no REMs you will have a
real job trying to remember how it worked and why you used
that variable name etc. etc. Use lots of REMs – it will save you
hours of time in the long run.

Examples
     10 REM this revision dated 25-3-82
   100 REM
   550 REM data for British Leyland cars

Description
This statement allows comments to be inserted in a program.

Syntax
REM <anything>

                               334
RENUMBER
Purpose
When you type in a program you give each instruction a line
number. As the program develops you quite often have to
insert extra lines between other lines. You might well need to
insert 25 lines between line number 300 and 310 – difficult!
The RENUMBER command will go through your program and
renumber it automatically. It deals successfully with things like
GOTO 220 – which might well become GOTO 180 etc.
However if your program contains the statement GOTO 100
and there is no line 100 then the RENUMBER command will be
unable to deal with the problem, and will say
Failed at line....
If you renumber a program containing an ON GOTO statement
which contains a calculated line number, e.g.
ON X GOTO 120,240,2*R,1000,2000
then RENUMBER will deal successfully with references before
the calculated line number. However it will not deal with the
calculated line number or other line numbers in the same
statement – ie 2*R, 1000 and 2000 in the example given.
The command RENUMBER will renumber your program
giving the first line the number 10, the second 20 and so on.
The command RENUMBER 200 will give the first line of your
program the number 200, the second will become line 210 etc.
etc.
The command RENUMBER 200,4 would renumber starting
with line 200 and then using 204, 208 etc. etc.
RENUMBER is a command: it cannot be used in a program, or
as part of a multiple statement line.

                              335
Examples
RENUMBER
RENUMBER 100,20
RENUMBER 6000

Description
RENUMBER is a command which renumbers a user’s program
and will correct most of the cross-references within the
program.

Syntax
RENUMBER [<num-const>[,<num-const>]]

                          336
REPEAT
Purpose
To make the computer repeat a set of instructions a number of
times until some condition is met.
If you jump out of a REPEAT...UNTIL loop with a GOTO
statement (which is bad practice) you must jump back in.
A single REPEAT may have more than one UNTIL.

Example
    10    REM print stars for 1 second
    20    NOW=TIME
    30    REPEAT PRINT "*";
    40    UNTIL TIME=NOW+100

Description
A statement which is the start of a REPEAT...UNTIL loop.
These loops always execute once and may be nested up to a
depth of 20.

Syntax
REPEAT

Associated keywords
UNTIL

                             337
REPORT
Purpose
To get the computer to report in words what the last error was.

Example
100 REPORT

Description
REPORT prints the error message appropriate to the last error
condition.

Syntax
REPORT

Associated keywords
ERR, ERL, ON ERROR

                              338
RESTORE
Purpose
Sometimes it is useful to have several sets of data in one
program. For example one might want information on British
Leyland cars and on Lotus cars as in the example shown on
page 128. The RESTORE statement enables the data-pointer to
be moved from one set of data to the other.
The word RESTORE by itself resets the data pointer to the first
set of data in the program.

Examples
   230 RESTORE
   100 RESTORE 6500
RESTORE apointer

Description
This statement can be used at any time to reset the data pointer
to any selected line number.

Syntax
RESTORE [<numeric>]

Associated keywords
READ, DATA

                              339
RETURN
Purpose
The word RETURN – not the key marked RETURN – is used in
a program at the end of a subroutine to make the computer
return to the place in the program which originally ‘called’ the
subroutine. See GOSUB on page 265 for more details.
There may be more than one RETURN statement in a
subroutine – but preferably there should be one entry point
and one (RETURN) exit point.
You should try very hard to avoid leaving a subroutine with
GOTO, you should always exit with RETURN. Why? Well you
will soon discover in reasonable sized programs that you can
get into an awful tangle and lose track of how a program works
if you make the program jump all over the place.
The importance of dividing your programs into clearly defined
sections wherever possible, with one entry point and one exit
point, cannot be over emphasised.

Examples
   200 RETURN
   300 IF X>4 THEN RETURN

Description
A statement which causes the program to branch to the
statement after the one which contained the GOSUB which
called the current subroutine.

Syntax
RETURN

Associated keywords
GOSUB, ON GOSUB

                              340
RIGHT$ right string
Purpose
To copy the right hand part of one string into another string.
For example if
ABCDE$="HOW ARE YOU" then
RIGHT$(ABCDE$,3) would be "YOU" and
RIGHT$(ABCDE$,7) would be "ARE YOU"
Note that RIGHT$(ABCDE$,100) would be "HOW ARE
YOU" since there are only eleven characters in HOW ARE
YOU.

Examples
A$=RIGHT$(B$,5)
last$=RIGHT$(last$,X)

Description
A string function returning a specified number of characters
from the right hand end of another string.

Syntax
<string-var>=RIGHT$(<string>,<numeric>)

Associated keywords
LEFT$, MID$

                              341
RND random
Purpose
To generate, or make, a random number.
What exactly this function does is determined by the number
which follows the word RND.
RND by itself generates a random whole number between
–2147483648 and 2147483647
RND(-X) returns the value -X and resets the random number
generator to a number based on X
RND(0) repeats the last random number given by RND(1)
RND(1) generates a random number between 0 and 0.999999
RND(X) generates a random whole number between (and
possibly including) 1 and X
The brackets are compulsory and must immediately follow the
word RND with no intervening space.

Examples
PRINT RND(6)
   340 largenumber%=RND
   950 PRINT RND(1)

Description
A function generating a random number. The range of the
number generated depends on the argument (if any).

Syntax
<num–var> = RND[(<numeric>)]

Associated keywords
None

                             342
RUN
Purpose
To make the computer obey the statements in the program in
its memory.
All variables (except the resident integer numeric variables @%
and A% to Z%) are first deleted and then the program is
executed.
RUN is a statement and programs may therefore execute
themselves.
If you want to start a program without clearing all the variables
then you can use the statement
GOTO 100
or GOTO whatever line number you wish to start from, instead
of RUN.

Examples
RUN
 9000 RUN

Description
RUN is a statement causing the computer to execute the current
program.

Syntax
RUN

Associated keywords
NEW, OLD, LIST, CHAIN

                              343
SAVE
Purpose
To save a program that is in the computer’s memory onto
cassette or disc. The program must be given a name – usually
called its filename. The filename can have up to 10 letters and
numbers in a cassette system, must start with a letter, and
cannot contain spaces or punctuation marks.

Examples
SAVE "FRED"
SAVE A$

Description
A command which saves the current program area – that is the
area between the address given in the variables PAGE and
TOP.

Syntax
SAVE <string>

Associated keywords
LOAD, CHAIN

                              344
SGN sign
Purpose
This determines whether a number is positive, zero or
negative. The function returns
–1 for negative number
 0 for zero
+1 for positive number.

Examples
   100 X=SGN(Y)
   230 result=SGN(difference)

Description
A function returning –1 for an argument which is negative, +1
for a positive argument and zero for an argument equal to zero.

Syntax
<num-var> = SGN(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
ABS

                             345
SIN sine
Purpose
This calculates the sine of an angle. The angle must be
expressed in radians rather than degrees – but you can convert
from degrees to radians using the function RAD.

Examples
    120 Y=SIN(RAD(45))
   2340 value=SIN(1.56)

Description
A function giving the sine of its argument. The argument must
be in radians.

Syntax
<num-var> = SIN(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
COS, TAN, ACS, ASN, ATN, DEG, RAD

Demonstration program
To draw a sine wave on the screen
    10   MODE 4
    20   FOR X=0 TO 1280 STEP 4
    30   DRAW X,500+500*SIN(X/50)
    40   NEXT X

                             346
SOUND
Purpose
This statement is used to make the computer generate sounds
using the internal loudspeaker. The sound generator is capable
of making four sounds at once. Each of the four sound channels
can generate one note. The keyword SOUND must be followed
by four numbers which specify
which sound channel is to be used
the loudness of the note (or the envelope number)
the pitch of the note
how long the note is to last
For example:
SOUND 1,-15,53,20
will play a note on sound channel 1, with a loudness of –15
(maximum volume). A pitch value of 53 gives middle C and a
duration of 20 will make the note last for 1 second.
SOUND C,A,P,D
The channel number (C) can be 0, 1, 2, or 3. Channel 0 is a
special channel that can produce various noises, whereas
channels 1, 2 and 3 are used to produce single notes. Other
values of C (the channel number) produce special effects which
are explained further on.
The amplitude or loudness (A) can have any whole number
value between –15 and 4. Values –15 to 0 produce notes of fixed
loudness throughout the whole note. A value of –15 is the
loudest, –7 is half volume and 0 produces silence. Values of 1 to
4 enable the amplitude to be controlled while the note is
playing. When you play a note on the piano the sound
gradually fades away. Effects like this are selected by using one
of the 4 user-defined envelopes which are selected by setting A
to be 1,2,3 or 4. Envelopes are explained on pages 182 and 244.
The pitch (P) is used to set the pitch or frequency of the note.
The pitch can have any value between 0 and 255. The note A
above middle C is selected with a value of 89. The table on
                               347
page 181 shows the value of P needed to produce a particular
note. You will see that to go up an octave P is increased by 48
and to go up a perfect 5th P must be increased by 28.
Increasing the value of P by one will increase the note
produced by a quarter of a semi-tone.
To play the chord of C major which consists of the notes C, E
and G for 2 seconds you could enter
   100 SOUND 1,-15,53,40
   110 SOUND 2,-15,69,40
   120 SOUND 3,-15,81,40
Whereas to play a number of notes in succession you would
enter
   100    SOUND     1,-15,97,10
   110    SOUND     1,-15,105,10
   120    SOUND     1,-15,89,10
   130    SOUND     1,-15,41,10
   140    SOUND     1,-15,69,20
which plays a well-known film theme.
The duration (D) can have any value between –1 and 254.
Values in the range 0 to 254 give a note duration of that number
of twentieths of a second. Thus if D=40 the note will last for 2
seconds. Setting D=–1 means that the note will continue to
sound until you actually take steps to stop it. You can either
press the ESCAPE key or stop it by sending another note, to the
same channel, which has “Flush Control” set to 1 – see page 351
later in this section.
As was mentioned earlier in this section, channel number 0
produces “noises” rather than notes and the value of P in the
statement
SOUND 0,A,P,D
has a different effect from that described for channels 1, 2 and
3. Here is a summary of the effects of different values of P on
the noise channel:
P Effect
0 High frequency periodic noise
1 Medium frequency periodic noise
2 Low frequency periodic noise

                               348
3 Periodic noise of frequency determined by the pitch setting
  of channel 1
4 High frequency “white” noise
5 Medium frequency “white” noise
6 Low frequency “white” noise
7 Noise of frequency determined (continuously) by the pitch
  setting of channel 1
Values of P between 0 and 3 produce a rather rasping, harsh
note. With P set to 4 the noise is not unlike that produced by a
radio when it is not tuned to a station – sort of “shssh” effect.
P=6 sounds like the interference found on bad telephone call.
When P is set to 3 or 7 then the frequency of the noise is
controlled by the pitch setting of sound channel number 1. If
the pitch of channel 1 is changed while channel 0 is generating
noise then the pitch of the noise will also change. The program
below generates a noise on channel 0 and varies the pitch of the
noise by changing the pitch of channel 1. Notice that the
amplitude of channel one is very low (–1) so you will hardly
hear it – but you will hear the noise on channel 0.
   100    SOUND 0,-15,7,150
   110    FOR P=100 TO 250
   120    SOUND 1,-1,P,1
   130    NEXT P
Notice that we have not yet described how sounds can be
affected by a superimposed envelope. An envelope can affect
both the pitch and amplitude of a note as it is playing. Thus the
statement
SOUND 1,-15,255,255
merely plays a continuous loud note, whereas
ENVELOPE 1,1,-26,-36,-45,255,
255,255,127,0,0,-127,126,0
SOUND 1,1,255,255
produces a complex sound controlled largely by the envelope.
See the keyword ENVELOPE for more details.
As mentioned briefly at the start of the description of the
SOUND statement, the channel number, C can be given values
other than 0, 1, 2 and 3. You need not understand exactly why
the following works to use it!
                              349
For C one can write a four figure hexadecimal number to
achieve certain effects – for example:
SOUND &1213,-15,53,40
The first parameter in the above example has the value
&1213. The ampersand (&) indicates to the computer that the
number is to be treated as a hexadecimal number. The four
figures which follow the ampersand each control one feature.
In this new expanded form the SOUND statement looks like
SOUND &HSFC,A,P,D
and the functions H, S, F and C will be explained in turn. In
essence these numbers enable one to synchronize notes so that
one can play chords effectively.

The first number (H) can have the value 0 or 1. If H=1 then
instead of playing a new note on the selected channel, the
previous note on that channel is allowed to continue. If a note
were gently dying away then it might be abruptly terminated
when its time was up. Setting H=1 allows the note to continue
instead of playing a new note. If H=1 then the amplitude and
pitch defined by the rest of the SOUND statement is ignored.

The second number (S) is used to synchronize the playing of a
number of notes. If S=0 then the notes are played as soon as the
last note on the selected channel has completed. (There is a
slight simplification here; “completed” means “has reached the
start of the release phase”.) The user is referred to the keyword
ENVELOPE for relevant detail.
A non-zero value of S indicates to the computer that this note is
not to be played until you have a corresponding note on
another channel ready to be played. A value of S=1 implies that
there is one other note in the group. S=2 implies two other
notes (i.e. a total of 3). If a note was sent to channel one with S
set to 1 then it would not be played until a note was ready on
another channel which also had S set to 1. For example:
   100 SOUND &101,-15,50,200
   110 SOUND 2,-15,200,100
   120 SOUND &102,-15,100,200

                               350
When this program is run the note at line 100 will not play until
channel 2 is free. Line 110 sounds a note immediately on
channel 2 – and for 5 seconds (duration 100). When that note
has completed then both the notes from lines 100 and 120 will
sound together.

The third number (F) can have the value 0 or 1. If it is set to 1
then the sound statement in which it occurs flushes (throws
away) any other notes waiting in the queue for a particular
channel. It also stops whatever note is being generated on that
channel at present. The sound statement in which F=1 then
plays its note. Setting F behaves like an “over-ride”. For
example:
     20 SOUND 2,-15,200,100
     25 FOR X=1 TO 500:NEXT X
     30 SOUND &12,-15,100,200
In the above situation line 20 will start a sound on channel 2
but this will be stopped almost immediately by line 30 which
will generate a lower and longer note on channel 2. Line 25 just
gives a short delay.
Setting F=1 provides an easy way of stopping an everlasting
note! Thus SOUND &13,0,0,1 stops the current note on
channel 3 and instead plays one at zero loudness and of
minimum length. This will stop channel 3 immediately.

The last number (C) is the channel number described earlier.

Description
The sound generator has four separately-controlled synthesis
channels. Each can sound at one of 16 amplitudes, including
‘off’. The audio output is the sum of the channel outputs.
Channels 1–3 each generate a squarewave with programmable
frequency. Channel 0 can produce noise (unpitched sound of
psuedo-random structure) or a pulse waveform. The frequency
of the pulsewave or period of the noise can be set to one of the
three fixed options, or to the frequency of channel 1.
The basic program generates each sound by initiating one or
more ‘requests’, each of which may take the form of a musical
note or a single effect and is directed to a specific channel. If the
destination channel is idle when a request requires it, the

                                351
sound starts playing immediately. If a previous request is still
being handled the new one is placed on a queue, where it waits
until the current event is over (or past a critical stage – see
ENVELOPE). If the queue is full, the program waits. Separate
queues are provided for the four channels, each of which can
hold up to five requests, not counting the one currently being
executed. The program can look at the state of any queue and
flush any queue, but cannot find out or alter the state of the
current event, except for flushing the whole queue.
The SOUND keyword is followed by four parameters, the first
of which consists of 4 hexadecimal digits. Thus
SOUND &HSFC,A,P,D
          Range                Function
H           0 or      1        Continuation
S           0 to      3        Synchronization
F           0 or      1        Flush
C           0 to      3        Channel number
A         -15 to      4        Amplitude or envelope number
P           0 to      255      Pitch
D           1 to      255      Duration
The ‘H’ parameter allows the previous event on that channel to
continue, and if this is 1, the amplitude and pitch parameters of
SOUND have no effect. Because the dummy note is queued in
the normal way, it can be used to ensure that the release
segment of a sound, which occurs after the duration is over and
would otherwise be truncated by the next sounding event on
the same channel, is allowed to complete.
The ‘S’ parameter allows requests to be queued separately and
then executed at the same instant, for chords and multiple
voice effects. The value initially determines the number of
other channels that must receive requests with the same value
of ‘S’, before the group will play. For example, each note of a
three-note chord would be generated by a SOUND with the
value of 2 for ‘S’. The system will read the value of ‘S’ from the
first one and then wait for 2 more requests with 2 as the value
of ‘S’ before playing the complete chord. Single requests use 0
for ‘S’ so they play as soon as they reach the end of the channel
queue.

                               352
The parameter ‘F’ will normally be zero, causing the request to
be queued. If it is 1, the channel queue will be flushed first, so
the request will sound immediately.
The parameter ‘C’ determines the number of the sound channel
to be used.
The ‘A’ parameter controls the amplitude of the sound and can
be used in two ways. Positive values up to 4 select the envelope
(1 to 4) to be used. If the RS423 and cassette output buffers are
unused then envelope numbers up to 16 may be defined and
used. Zero and negative integers up to –15 directly set the
amplitude of the sound, which is then fixed at this value for the
duration of the note. –15 corresponds to the loudest, and 0 is
‘off’.
The ‘P’ parameter determines the pitch of the note. It can take
values from 0 to 255.
The ‘D’ parameter determines the total duration of sounds
whose amplitude is determined explicitly by a negative or zero
value of ‘A’ parameter. The duration is given in twentieths of a
second. If an envelope has been selected, by a positive value of
‘A’, then the duration ‘D’ determines the total of the attack,
decay and sustain periods – but not of the release phase.

Syntax
SOUND <numeric>,<numeric>,<numeric>,
<numeric>

Associated keywords
ENVELOPE, ADVAL

                               353
SPC space
Purpose
This statement is used to print multiple spaces on the screen. It
can only be used as part of PRINT or INPUT statements. The
number in brackets gives the number of spaces to be printed.

Examples
  120 PRINT "Name";SPC(6);"Age";
SPC(10);"Hours"
 4030 INPUT SPC(10),"Value",V

Description
A statement printing a number of spaces on the screen. Up to
255 spaces may be printed.

Syntax
PRINT SPC(<numeric>)
or
INPUT SPC(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
TAB, PRINT, INPUT

                               354
SQR square root
Purpose
This statement is used to calculate the square root of a number.

Examples
    10 X=SQR(Y)
   300 X=(-B+SQR(B^2-4*A*C))/(2*A)

Description
A function returning the square root of its argument. An
attempt to calculate the square root of a negative number will
produce the error message ‘-ve root’ which is error number 21.

Syntax
<num-var> = SQR(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
None

                              355
STEP
Purpose
This is part of the FOR...TO...STEP...NEXT
structure.
In the program shown below, STEP indicates the amount that
the variable cost is to be increased each time around the
loop. In this case the cost is to increase in steps of 5 units.
The step may be positive or negative.
STEP is optional, if omitted a step size of +1 is assumed – see
FOR on page 260.

Example
   300 FOR X=100 TO 20 STEP -2.3

Description
Part of the FOR...NEXT construct. STEP is optional.

Syntax
FOR <num-var> = <numeric> TO <numeric>
[STEP <numeric>]

Associated keywords
FOR, TO, NEXT

Demonstration program
   230    FOR cost=100 TO 200 STEP 5
   250    production=FNtaken(cost)
   260    PRINT production,cost
   270    NEXT cost

                              356
STOP
Purpose
This statement interrupts a program which is running and
prints the message
STOP at line XXXX
on the screen; otherwise the effect is identical to END.
STOP may occur as many times as is needed in a program.

Examples
 2890 STOP
 3080 STOP

Description
Causes execution of the program to cease and a message to be
printed out.

Syntax
STOP

Associated keywords
END

                               357
STR$ string
Purpose
This string function converts a number into the equivalent
string representation. Thus STR$(4.6) would give "4.6".
STR$ is affected by the field width and format constraints
imposed by the variable @%. The default format is G9 with
B1=0. See page 70.
The opposite function of converting a string into a number is
performed by the function VAL.

Examples
    20 A$=STR$(X)
 5060 num$=STR$(size)

Description
A string function which returns the string form of the numeric
argument as it would have been printed.

Syntax
<string-var> = STR$(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
VAL, PRINT

                              358
STRING$
Purpose
This produces a long string consisting of multiple copies of a
shorter string. Thus STRING$(6,"--0") would be
--0--0--0--0--0--0. This function is useful for
decorative features. It should be used whenever the user needs
to generate a long string from lots of identical short strings.
It is very important, to avoid wasting memory space, that
strings are set to their maximum length the first time that they
are allocated. This can easily be done by using STRING$. For
example to set A$ to contain up to 40 characters one could
write
A$=STRING$(40, " ")
A$ can then be set back to empty using A$="" before use.

Examples
   400 A$=STRING$(x,pattern$)
   560 B4$=STRING$(5,"0+")
PRINT STRING$(10,"hello")

Description
A string function returning multiple concatenations of a string.

Syntax
<string-var> =
STRING$(<numeric>,<string>)

                              359
TAB tabulation
Purpose
TAB can only be used with the keywords PRINT and
INPUT. There are two versions:
TAB(X) will print spaces up to a certain column position. If
the flashing cursor is beyond the required position then the
cursor will move to the next line down and space across to the
required column.
TAB(X,Y) will move the cursor directly to position X, Y on
the screen. Note that once TAB(X,Y) has been used on a
line, TAB(X) may not move to the correct position on the line.
The origin (for all text commands) is at the top left of the
current text area of the screen.
The left hand column of the screen is column number 0. The
right hand is column 19, 39, or 79 depending on the graphics
mode selected.
The top line is line number 0, the bottom line is line number 31
or 24.
If the text scrolling area of the screen is changed then the TAB
command will still work as outlined above.

Examples
   340 PRINT TAB(10);name$TAB(30);job$
   440 PRINT TAB(20,31);value
   230 INPUT TAB(10,20) "How much" cost
  875 INPUT TAB(30), "Doctors name",
DOC$

                                360
Description
TAB with a single argument prints spaces (and a newline if
necessary) to reach the specified column.
TAB with two arguments moves the cursor directly to the
specified co-ordinates.

Syntax
PRINT TAB(<numeric>[,<numeric>])
or
INPUT TAB(<numeric>[,<numeric>])

Associated keywords
POS, VPOS, PRINT, INPUT

                             361
TAN tangent
Purpose
This mathematical function calculates the tangent of the angle
given.
The angle must be given in radians but may be converted to
radians from degrees using the function RAD. 1 radian is about
57 degrees.

Examples
PRINT TAN(RAD(45))
    10 Y=TAN(X)
1030 droop=TAN(load)

Description
A function returning the tangent of the argument. The
argument must be given in radians.

Syntax
<num-var> = TAN(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
COS, SIN, ACS, ATN, DEG, RAD

                              362
THEN
Purpose
A keyword used with IF to decide on a course of action as the
result of some test.

Examples
  780 IF X=6 THEN PRINT "good" ELSE
PRINT "bad"
  200 IF A$=B$ THEN PROCgood ELSE
PROCbad

Description
Optional part of the IF...THEN...ELSE structure.
Note that it is not optional if used when the condition assigns
to a pseudo variable, eg
   300 IF X THEN TIME=0

Syntax
IF <testable condition> THEN
<statement> [ELSE <statement>]

Associated keywords
IF, ELSE

                              363
TIME
Purpose
This can be used to set or read the internal timer.
The timer counts in one hundredth of a second intervals. It is
not a clock providing true time-of-day readout. You can’t use it
to check the Greenwich Time Signal! However, once set, the
internal clock will keep good time. Pressing the BREAK key
does not reset the clock.
To convert TIME to a 24 hour clock use the following routines:
 1000 SEC=(TIME DIV 100) MOD 60
 1010 MIN=(TIME DIV 6000) MOD 60
 1020 HR =(TIME DIV 360000) MOD 24

Examples
205 TIME=((Ho*60+Mi)*60+Se)*100
400 nowtime=TIME

Description
A pseudo-variable which sets or reads the lower four bytes of
the internal elapsed time clock.

Syntax
TIME = <numeric>
or
<num-var> = TIME

Demonstration program
 1070     finishtime=TIME+1000
 1080     REPEAT
 1090     REM wait for 10 seconds
 1100     UNTIL TIME>=finishtime

                               364
TO
Purpose
Part of the FOR...TO...STEP...NEXT statement. The
final terminating value of the loop is given after the word TO.
See page 91 for further information.

Description
Part of the FOR...NEXT construct.

Syntax
FOR <num-var> = <numeric> TO <numeric>
[STEP <numeric>]

Associated keywords
FOR, STEP, NEXT

Demonstration program
    10   MODE 5
    20   FOR C=1 TO 3
    30   GCOL 3,C
    40   FOR X=0 TO 1200 STEP 5*C
    50   MOVE 600,1000
    60   DRAW X,0
    70   NEXT X
    80   NEXT C

                              365
TOP
Purpose
The function TOP returns the address of the first free memory
location after the user’s program. The user’s program is
normally stored from the bottom of the available Random
Access Memory upwards.
Thus the length of the user’s program in bytes is given by
TOP-PAGE.

Examples
PRINT~(TOP-PAGE):REM length in hex
 2340 PRINT TOP
 5460 X=TOP

Description
A function returning the first free location above the user’s
program.

Syntax
<num-var> = TOP

Associated keywords
PAGE, HIMEM, LOMEM

                               366
TRACE
Purpose
TRACE makes the computer print out the line number of each
line of the program before execution.
There are three forms of TRACE:
TRACE ON        causes the computer to print line numbers
TRACE OFF turns off the trace facility
TRACE 6780 would cause the computer to report only line
numbers below 6780.
With well-structured programs which have subroutines at high
line numbers this will enable the user to trace through the
structure of the program without being bothered with line
numbers in procedures, functions and subroutines.
Note that the interpreter does not execute line numbers very
often
    10 FOR Z=0 TO 100
    20 Q=Q*Z: NEXT Z
    30 END
would print [10] [20] [30] but
    10   FOR Z=0 TO 100
    20   Q=Q*Z
    25   NEXT Z
    30   END
would print [10] [20] [25]
            [25] [25] [25] [25] etc.
(Of course in mode 7 the [ appears as f and ] appears as g.)
TRACE is also turned off after an error, or by pressing
ESCAPE or BREAK .

                              367
Examples
TRACE ON
TRACE OFF
TRACE X
TRACE 3000

Description
TRACE ON causes the interpreter to print executed line
numbers when it encounters them.
TRACE X sets a limit on the size of line numbers which may
be printed out; only numbers less than X will be printed.
TRACE OFF turns trace mode off.

Syntax
TRACE ON|OFF|<numeric>

                             368
TRUE
Purpose
TRUE is represented by the value –1 in this computer.

Examples
PRINT TRUE
   300 UNTIL result = TRUE

Description
A function returning –1.

Syntax
<num-var> = TRUE

Associated keywords
FALSE

                             369
UNTIL
Purpose
Part of the REPEAT...UNTIL construct. See the keyword
REPEAT for more details.

Example
   450 UNTIL X<10

Description
A program object signifying the end of a
REPEAT...UNTIL loop.

Syntax
UNTIL <testable condition>

Associated keywords
REPEAT

                             370
USR user
Purpose
The USR function provides the user with a means of calling
sections of machine code program which are designed to return
one value. When the machine code section is called the
computer sets the processor’s A, X and Y registers to the least
significant bytes of A%, X% and Y%. The carry flag (C) is set to
the least significant bit of C%. On return from the machine code
section, an integer number is generated from the four registers
P, Y, X, A (most significant byte to least significant byte).
Again it must be emphasised that USR returns a result whereas
CALL does not. Therefore you must either assign the result to
a variable
X=USR(&3000)
or print the result
PRINT USR(&3000)

Examples
 1400 R=USR(&3000)
   670 result=USR(plot5)

Description
A function allowing machine code to directly return a value for
problems which do not require the flexibility of CALL.

Syntax
<num-var> = USR(<numeric>)

Associated keywords
CALL

                              371
VAL value
Purpose
This function takes a string which contains a number and
produces the number. In other words it can convert a number
represented by a string (eg A$="+24") into the number.
The string must start with a plus (+) or minus (–) sign or a
number. If not then the function will return zero.
The opposite function is performed by STR$.

Examples
   450 x=VAL(length$)
 1560 date=VAL(DATE$)

Description
A function which converts a character string representing a
number into numeric form. If the argument is not a signed
unary constant then zero will be returned.

Syntax
<num-var> = VAL(<string>)

Associated keywords
STR$

                               372
VDU
Purpose
The statement VDU is followed by one or more numbers and
the ascii characters corresponding to these numbers are sent to
the screen. The function CHR$ can generate a single ascii
character from a given number. This character can be added to
a string or printed. VDU on the other hand is used to generate a
sequence of numbers that are then sent to the vdu drivers.
VDU provides an easy way of sending, for example, control
characters to the vdu drivers. See page 378 for a detailed list of
the VDU control codes.
Two examples will make the purpose of this statement clearer:
when defining the text area of the screen four bytes have to
follow the VDU 28 statement. These four bytes represent the
left X, bottom Y, right X and top Y co-ordinates of the text area.
The range of X is 0-39 and of Y is 0-31 in mode 4. Thus
VDU 28,0,5,39,0
would define a 6 line text window at the top of the screen. If a
different mode is selected then the maximum screen width may
be either 19, 39 or 79.
The graphics area of the screen, on the other hand, uses
co-ordinates up to 1279 points horizontally. Thus when
defining the graphics area double byte numbers must be sent to
the vdu drivers since the largest number that can be sent as a
single byte is 255.
VDU 24,0;0;1279;830; will define a graphics area at
the bottom of the screen and 830 points high. Each of the four
co-ordinates is sent as a double byte pair. Note that the
graphics origin is bottom left whereas the text origin is top left
and that the graphics screen is always 1280 by 1024 regardless
of mode.
VDU is equivalent to PRINT CHR$; except that it does not
change the value of COUNT.

                               373
Examples
VDU 14 turn “auto-paging mode” on
VDU 15 turn “auto-paging mode” off
VDU 2 turn printer on

Description
A statement which takes a list of numeric arguments and sends
them to the operating system output character routine
(oswrch). If the arguments are separated by commas then
single bytes are sent. If any argument is followed by a
semi-colon then that argument will be sent as two bytes. The
Least Significant Byte will be sent first, followed by the Most
Significant Byte. This is the order required by the vdu drivers.

Syntax
VDU <numeric>{,|;<numeric>)[;]

Associated keywords
CHR$

                              374
                     vertical position of the
VPOS                 cursor

Purpose
VPOS is used to find the vertical position of the text cursor on
the screen.

Examples
   670 V=VPOS
   100 PRINT VPOS

Description
A function returning the vertical position of the text cursor.

Syntax
<num-var> = VPOS

Associated keywords
POS

                               375
WIDTH
Purpose
WIDTH is used to set the overall “page width” that the
computer uses. Initially this is set to zero which the interpreter
interprets as “unlimited width”.
WIDTH n will cause the interpreter to force a new line after n
characters have been printed by the PRINT statement.
WIDTH also affects all output to the printer.

Examples
   670 WIDTH 60
WIDTH 35

Description
A statement controlling the overall output field width. It is
initially set to zero which disables auto newlines.

Syntax
WIDTH <numeric>

Associated keywords
COUNT

                               376
