# 35. Cassette files

35 Cassette files

This chapter summarises the facilities available for file handling
using a cassette recorder. Refer to section 5 page 34 for an
introduction to loading and saving basic programs.

A. Cassette motor control
Some cassette recorders have a “remote” or “automatic motor
control” socket. This can be used with a switch on the
microphone to start and stop the tape. If your recorder is of this
type then the computer will be able to start and stop the tape
automatically at the start and end of each basic program or
section of recorded data.
If your cassette recorder does not have motor control then you
will have to start and stop the tape manually. A light is
provided on the keyboard to tell you when the tape should be
running. This light is labelled “cassette motor”. When it is on,
the tape should be running.
The description which follows assumes that you have
“automatic” or “remote” motor control.

B. Recording levels
Many cassette recorders employ “automatic record level”.
Recorders of this type do not have any “record level” controls.
If your recorder does not have “automatic record level” then
you will have to set the record level yourself. Set the control so
that the recording level indicator is slightly below the “0dB”
level or the red mark.

C. Playback volume and tone
It is important that the playback volume is set correctly. A
detailed description of how to do this is given on page 12. The
tone control should normally be set to “Maximum” or “High”.

                               390
D. Keeping an Index of Programs
You will be able to record a large number of basic programs on
a single cassette. However it is vital that the programs do not
overlap on the tape. If they do then you will lose one of them. It
is strongly suggested that you space the programs out along
the tape. Use the tape counter to start recording at positions
000, 100, 200, 300 and so on. But beware of recording on the
blank leader tape – always wind it on a little first. In this way
you will not only be able to find programs easily but you will
leave good clear gaps between average sized programs.
If you forget what is on a tape then you can always use the
command
*CAT
to obtain a “catalogue” of the tape. When you give the
command *CAT (and press the play button on the recorder)
the tape will play through, and the computer will print a
catalogue of all the programs onto the screen. The catalogue
gives the program name, the number of blocks (rather like
pages in a book) used to record the program and lastly the
length of the program (the number of letters in the book). It
also checks that the recording is readable and reports any
errors. As the catalogue is building up on the screen you will
often see something like this
SKETCH            02
This indicates that the computer has found a file called
SKETCH and that it is currently checking block 2 of that file.
The block number is given in hexadecimal not decimal
numbers. Press ESCAPE at the end of the tape to get back
control of the computer.

E. Saving a BASIC program
A program that you have typed into the computer’s memory
can be saved onto cassette tape in the following way:
1 Insert the cassette into the recorder
2 Type SAVE"PROG"
and press RETURN.
PROG is just an example of a “file-name”; file-names are
explained under P of this section.

                               391
3 A message RECORD then RETURN will appear. Now
use the fast forward and reverse buttons to position the tape at
the correct place.
4 Press the record and play buttons on the cassette recorder.
5 Press the RETURN key on the computer to let it know that
everything is now ready.
6 The computer will then record your program.
7 The tape will automatically stop when the computer has
finished recording your program.
You can always abandon this process by pressing ESCAPE

F. Saving a section of memory
This will not be needed by most people writing basic
programs. It is most often used to record sections of machine
code programs. The process is very similar to that employed to
record a basic program.
1 Insert the cassette in the recorder.
2 Type *SAVE PROG SSSS FFFF EEEE RRRR
and press RETURN
3 to 7 as for SAVE shown above.
SSSS represents the start address of the data, in hexadecimal.
FFFF represents the end address of the data plus one, in hex.
As an option the format +LLLL can be used in this position.
The plus sign is followed by the length of the data, in hex.
EEEE represents the (hex) execution address of the data. If the
program is reloaded into the computer using the command
*RUN PROG
then once loaded the computer will jump to the specified
execution address. The execution address is optional and if it is
omitted the execution address will be assumed to be equal to
the start address.
RRRR represents the (hex) reload address. This is optional, but
if used the file will reload (using *LOAD, see below) at address
RRRR. If RRRR is omitted then the file will reload at SSSS.
Two examples may make the syntax clearer:

                               392
*SAVE patch 6000 6200
*SAVE match 4C00+0CE9 2A10 2000

G. Loading a BASIC program
A basic program saved on cassette tape can be loaded into the
computer’s memory in the following way:
1 Insert the cassette in the recorder.
2 Type LOAD "PROG" and press RETURN.
3 The message Searching will appear.
4 Now use the fast forward and reverse buttons to position the
tape at the correct place.
5 Press the play button on the cassette recorder.
6 The computer will give you the message Loading when it
finds the correct program. It will then load it into its memory.
7 The tape will automatically stop when the computer has
finished loading.
When loading a program the usual catalogue-type display will
appear. The message Loading will appear when the correct
file is found. If the load should fail for any reason a message
will appear. See under Q of this section for information on
dealing with the problem.

H. Loading a machine code program
This will not be needed by most people using basic programs.
It is used to load special purpose programs. The process is
identical to that used to load a basic program except that the
command is
*LOAD PROG AAAA
AAAA represents the absolute load address. It is optional but, if
included, will force the program to load at the specified
address. It therefore over-rides the address given when the
program was saved. The program will load but not run; control
will return to basic.
Two examples may make the syntax clearer:
*LOAD patch
   100 MODE 7: *LOAD match 7E80
                               393
I. Loading and running a BASIC program
The statement CHAIN allows a basic program to LOAD and
RUN another basic program. It is particularly useful when
there is a sequence of related programs, for example on the
welcome cassette.
The command is used in exactly the same way as LOAD but
with the word CHAIN substituted for the word LOAD.
1 Insert the cassette in the recorder.
2 Type CHAIN "PROG" and press RETURN.
3 The message Searching will appear.
4 Now use the fast forward and reverse buttons to position the
tape at the correct place.
5 Press the play button on the cassette recorder.
6 The computer will give you the message Loading when it
finds the correct program. It will then load it into its memory.
7 The tape will automatically stop when the computer has
finished loading and the computer will automatically run the
program.

J. Loading and running a machine code program
A machine code program (not a basic program) can be loaded
and run by using the statement
*RUN PROG

K. Using a cassette file to provide “keyboard” input
It is possible to get the computer to accept input from a cassette
file instead of from the keyboard. In this case the cassette file
would contain a set of commands, or answers to questions
which a basic program would need. The command to force the
computer to accept input from a file called “edit” would be.
*EXEC edit
To create a suitable cassette file you will need to use the basic
statement BPUT# and not PRINT#, since the latter stores
things in internal format. The command *SPOOL also creates
suitable files – see page 402 for how to use it to merge
programs.

                               394
L. Reading cassette data files
Data, as well as programs, may be recorded on cassette tape.
This facility enables the user to keep records of names and
addresses (for example) on tape for later use. Since the cassette
tape can be started and stopped by the computer it also enables
it to record results from experiments over many hours.
If the user wishes to read a data file then he must first “open
the file for input”. In the process of opening a file the computer
will allocate a “channel number” to the operation. If we wished
to read in a list of names recorded on a data file called NAMES
then the following statement would get the channel number
into the variable X.
   100 X=OPENIN("NAMES")
Once a file has been “opened for input” data can be read in
from the tape. This can be done in two ways: a chunk at a time
(for example a whole name) or a single letter at a time.
Data is read in a chunk at a time by using the INPUT#X,A$
statement. This will read the first entry into A$.
To read a single character in use the function A=BGET#(X)

M. Testing for end of file
While reading data in it is useful to test to see if the end of the
file has been reached. This is done with the function EOF#. For
example
   100    DIM B$(20)
   110    Y=1
   120    X=OPENIN("NAMES")
   130    REPEAT
   140      INPUT#X,A$
   150      PRINT A$
   160      B$(Y)=A$
   165      Y=Y+1
   170      UNTIL EOF#X
   180    CLOSE#X
   190    END

                               395
The program above reads up to 20 names off tape, prints them
on the screen and then stores them in an array in memory. Of
course if there were more than 20 names on file then the
program would fail because the array can only hold 20 entries.
Note that EOF# is not implemented on release 0.10.

N. Storing data on tape
The data in the last example was read into an array in the
computer. It could be then edited and the corrected version
could be re-recorded on cassette.
The process of recording the data, on the cassette, consists of
three steps: open the file for output, write out the data and then
close the file. The example program records 20 entries back to
tape from the array in memory.
   200    X=OPENOUT("NEWNAMES")
   210    FOR Y=1 TO 20
   220      PRINT#X,A$(Y)
   230      NEXT Y
   240    CLOSE#X
   250    END
Note that line 200 will make the computer issue the message
RECORD then RETURN
as it did when saving a basic program.
The CLOSE# statement will record any remaining data and
then stop the recorder automatically.

O. Recording single characters on tape
Single characters (bytes) can be placed on tape using the
command BPUT#. The following program stores the alphabet
on tape. Note that the letter “A” has an ascii value of 65 and
the letter “Z” has an ascii value of 90.
   100    X=OPENOUT("ALPHABET")
   110    FOR D=65 TO 90
   120      BPUT#X,D
   130      NEXT D
   140    CLOSE#X
   150    END

                               396
P. File-names
File-names on cassettes can be up to 10 characters long and can
include any character except space.

Q. Responses to errors
If an error occurs during any of the following operations
SAVE
LOAD
CHAIN
*SAVE
*LOAD
*RUN
an error message and then the message Rewind tape will
be printed on the screen. The user must then rewind the tape a
short way and play it again. It is not usually necessary to
replay the whole program, but only far enough to load the
blocks causing errors.
If an error is detected during
BGET#
BPUT#
INPUT#
PRINT#
*EXEC
*SPOOL
the tape will stop and an error will be generated. This error can
be trapped by basic in the usual way.
The user can escape at any time by pressing the ESCAPE key.
The error numbers generated by the cassette file system are as
follows:
216 Data Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) error
217 Header CRC error
218 An unexpected block number was encountered
219 An unexpected file name was encountered
220 Syntax error – for example an illegal *OPT statement
222 An attempt was made to use a channel which was not
opened
223 End of file reached

                                 397
R. Changing responses to errors
If the user wishes to change the way the computer behaves
when it detects an error during a cassette file operation (e.g.
LOAD or SAVE) then this can be done with the *OPT
statement.
*OPT by itself resets error handling and the “message switch”
to their default values. Default values are given later.
*OPT 1,X is used to set the “message switch” which controls
the detail of the message.
X=0 implies no messages are issued
X=1 gives short messages
X=2 gives detailed information including load and execution
addresses.
*OPT 2,X is used to control the action that the computer
takes when it detects an error during a cassette file operation.
X=0 lets the computer ignore all errors though messages may
be given.
X=1 the computer prompts the user to re-try by re-winding
the cassette.
X=2 will make the computer abort the operation by
generating an error.
*OPT 3,X is used to set the interblock gap used when
recording data using PRINT#, and BPUT#. The gap on
SAVE is fixed. The value of X determines the gap in 1/10
seconds. If X is set to greater than 127 then the gap is set to the
default value.
The default values for the *OPT command are:
For LOAD, SAVE, CHAIN, *SAVE, *LOAD,
*RUN
*OPT 1,1           (short messages)
*OPT 2,1           (prompt for re-try)
*OPT 3,6           (0.6 second inter block gap)
For BGET#, INPUT#, BPUT#, PRINT#
*OPT 1,0           (No messages)
*OPT 2,2           (Abort on error)
*OPT 3,25          (2.5 second inter block gap)

                                398
S. Cassette tape format
The format of each block of data stored on cassette is given
here for those who wish to produce tapes on other machines
that may be read into the BBC computer.
5 seconds of 2400Hz tone
1 synchronization byte (&2A)
Filename (1 to 10 characters)
1 end of filename marker byte (&00)
Load address of file, 4 bytes, low byte first
Execution address of file, 4 bytes, low byte first
Block number – 2 bytes, low byte first
Data block length – 2 bytes, low byte first
Block flag – 1 byte
Spare – 4 bytes currently &00
CRC on header – 2 bytes
Data – 0 to 256 bytes
CRC on data – 2 bytes
Notes
1 Each data block has its own header as shown above
2 Load and execution addresses should have the top two
bytes set to &FF in 8 bit machines
3 Bit 7 of the Block flag is set on the last block of a file
4 CRC stands for Cyclic Redundancy Check.
The header CRC acts on all bytes from the filename to the spare
bytes inclusive. The data CRC acts on the data only. CRCs are
stored high byte first and are calculated as follows. In the
following C represents the character and H and L represent the
high and low bytes of the CRC.
H=C EOR H
FOR X=1 TO 8
T=0
IF (bit 7 of H=1) THEN HL=HL EOR &0810:T=1
HL=(HL*2+T) AND &FFFF
NEXT X
The above algorithm is not a basic program!

                                399
