# 37. Merge BASIC programs

37 How to merge two
   BASIC programs
There are a number of ways of merging two basic programs
together. Two are given below. In either case the line numbers
should not clash unintentionally.
In order to correctly merge two programs together it is
necessary to save one of them (the shorter one preferably), as
an ascii file rather than in the usual compressed format. This
ascii version of the program is then merged into the longer
program using the command *EXEC. Suppose we wish to
merge the program SHORT into the program LONG. First,
load in the first program
LOAD "SHORT"
and then create an ascii version by typing in the next three
lines
*SPOOL "SHORT2"
LIST
*SPOOL
This produces an ascii version of the program. The ascii
version is called SHORT2.
Now load in the big program by typing
LOAD "LONG"
This loads the long program
and lastly merge in the small program
*EXEC "SHORT2"
This merges the short program
The command
*SPOOL "SHORT2"

                              402
informs the computer that anything that it outputs to the
screen is also to be sent to a cassette (or disc, etc.) file called
SHORT2. When the computer lists the file it therefore creates
an ascii listing on cassette. The command *SPOOL without a
filename is used to end or close the spooled file.
Having created the ascii version of SHORT called SHORT2,
the user then loads the file LONG. The command *EXEC
"SHORT2" tells the computer to read in the file SHORT2 as
if it were getting characters from the keyboard. If the file
SHORT2 contains line numbers (as it does), then these lines
will just be added to the basic program. Of course, a line
number read in from SHORT2 will replace any line with an
identical line number in LONG, so it is normal to renumber the
two programs SHORT and LONG so that the line-numbers
don’t clash.
A rather quicker (and “dirtier”) method is given below – but if
you use this method you must make sure that the second
program that you loaded in uses larger line numbers than the
first program. You will get predictable but surprising results if
not.
Firstly load the program (with the lower line numbers) in the
normal way. Then get the computer to print, in hex, the
top-of-program address less 2 by entering
PRINT ~TOP-2
Call the resultant number XXXX. Then enter
*LOAD SHORT XXXX
to load the program SHORT (or whatever you have called it) in
above the first program. Finally type END to get the computer
to sort its internal pointers out. A typical dialogue might look
like this – assuming that one program is called ONE and the
other is called TWO.
>LOAD"ONE"
>PRINT~TOP-2
      195F
>*LOAD TWO 195F
>END
This method is very easy but you must look after the line
numbers.

                                403
