# 38. Using printers

38 Using printers

The Model B BBC computer can be used with the vast majority
of printers available today. It is not possible, though, to drive
old ‘Teletypes’ which operate at 10 characters per second, or
printers requiring a 20mA current loop connection. To use a
printer with your BBC computer you will need to do three
things.
1 Connect the printer to the computer.
2 Tell the computer whether your printer is plugged into the
parallel or serial printer port.
3 Tell the computer to copy everything sent to the screen to
the printer.

1 Connect the printer to the computer
As the above implies there are two possible sockets (ports) to
which you can connect the printer: The “parallel printer port” is
often called a “Centronics® compatible” port. Printers that need
to be connected to parallel ports usually have a 36-way
“Amphenol” socket. To connect the printer to the computer
you will need a cable made up as follows from a 26-way
Insulation Displacement Connector (RS part number 467-295),
1 metre of 26-way ribbon cable (RS part number 358-062), and 1
36-way Amphenol plug.
The 26-way cable should be inserted into the 36-way plug so
that pins 1 to 14 and 19 to 32 are connected. The cable should
be inserted into the 26-way plug so that pin 1 of the Amphenol
36-way plug is connected to pin 1 of the 26-way Insulation
Displacement plug.
A suitable, ready made lead is available as BBC Microcomputer
system part number ANG 04.

                               404
                1                                          18

                 19                                      36

                                                            36 way
                                                         Amphenol plug

                                                        26 way
                                                       ribbon cable

    bump
notch
                                             26 way Insulation
 1                                            Displacement plug
                           26

 A parallel printer cable
 Both plugs viewed looking at the pins on the underside of the plug body.

                                     405
Parallel printer connections
Name                         36-way plug              26-way plug
                             pin number               pin number
Strobe                       1                        1
Data 0                       2                        3
Data 1                       3                        5
Data 2                       4                        7
Data 3                       5                        9
Data 4                       6                        11
Data 5                       7                        13
Data 6                       8                        15
Data 7                       9                        17
Acknowledge                  10                       19
Ground                       19 to 32                 All even numbers

The “serial printer port” is often referred to as an “RS232-C” or
“V24” port. The standard connector plug is a “Cannon 25-way
D type” and there is also a standard for the connections to the
plug. Predictably however, different manufacturers disagree on
the interpretation of the standard! The serial port on the BBC
computer emerges via a 5-pin din plug and it will normally be
possible to drive a serial printer with just 3 wires. The views of
the two plugs are shown below from the outside of the case
and looking into the respective sockets.
                                                         receive to send

                                                                   ground
                                                         clear to ready
                                                         data se ound
                                                         signal etect

                                                         chassis data
                                                         reques end

                                                         transm ata

RTS               data in
                                                                   s

                                                                   d
                                                                gr
                                                                  d

                                                                 it
                                                                 t

                                                                 t
                                                         carrier

            GND

CTS               data out                 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

5-way din plug
for computer                                25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14
                                                             data terminal ready

                                        25-way D type plug for printer

                                  406
Connect a wire between GND and pin 7
Connect another wire between data out and pin 3
The position of the third wire varies from printer to printer.
For Qume printers connect CTS to pin 20.
If that doesn’t work then try CTS to pin 4.
Those who require a more complete RS232 connection should
try the following:
1 Data in to pin 2 (Transmit data)
2 Data out to pin 3 (Receive data)
3 CTS to pin 4 (Request to send)
4 RTS to pin 5 (Clear to send)
5 GND to pin 7 (Signal ground)

2 Tell the computer whether you are using a parallel or
serial printer
*FX 5 is used to inform the computer whether it is to send
printer output to the parallel or serial port. Type in either:
*FX 5,1 if you are using a parallel printer
*FX 5,2 if you are using a serial printer
The computer defaults to (assumes unless you tell it otherwise,
that you are using) a parallel printer.
If you have selected a serial printer then you will have to set
the “baud rate” to match that on the printer. The default setting
is 9600 baud but many printers run at other rates. Select one of
*FX   8,1         75     baud
*FX   8,2        150     baud
*FX   8,3        300     baud
*FX   8,4       1200     baud
*FX   8,5       2400     baud
*FX   8,6       4800     baud
*FX   8,7       9600     baud
*FX   8,8      19200     baud (this rate is not guaranteed)

3 Tell the computer to copy everything to the printer
This is often called “turning the printer on” – but, of course, we
are not referring to switching the printer on at the mains but
rather to enabling and disabling its printing.
To turn it on type CTRL B and to turn it off type CTRL C.

                               407
In a basic program VDU 2 will turn the printer on and VDU 3
will turn it off.
Note that all output will now appear on the screen and printer.
To send output to the printer only you can use *FX 3. See
page 422.

Characters not sent to the printer
Some printers automatically move the paper up one line when
they receive a carriage return. Since the computer also
moves the paper up one line (by using a linefeed), the paper
may move up two lines instead of one. It is possible to tell the
computer not to send any particular character to the printer.
The most common requirement is to ignore linefeed which
has an ascii code of 10. *FX 6 is used to set the printer ignore
character, so *FX 6,10 will set it to ignore “line feeds”.
*FX 6 should be set after *FX 5 has been used to select the
printer type. The default is to ignore line feeds.
Thus the complete set up sequence for a Serial printer running
at 1200 baud and which does not require “line feeds” would be:
*FX 5,2 – serial printer
*FX 8,4 – 1200 baud
*FX 6,10 – no line feeds (default so it may be omitted)
A few more detailed points:
Data is transmitted using 1 start bit, 8 data bits and 1 stop bit.
Receive baud rates may be the same or differ from transmit
baud rates. Receive baud rates are set by *FX 7.
The user may supply his or her own specialist printer driver
routine. The address of the user routine should be placed at
location &222 and the user defined routine can be selected as
the printer output routine with *FX 5,3.
If the user intercepts the Operating System Write Character
routine (oswrch) then all the vdu control codes must be dealt
with. When a basic program executes DRAW 10,10 a string
of 6 bytes is sent to the vdu driver via oswrch. In this case the
bytes would be 25,5,10,0,10,0, so beware!

                                408
