# 40. HIMEM, LOMEM, TOP and PAGE

40 HIMEM, LOMEM,
   TOP and PAGE
These four psuedo-variables give the programmer an
indication of the way the computer has allocated the available
memory. PAGE and TOP give the bottom and top of the user’s
program so
PRINT TOP-PAGE
can be used to find out how big a program is.
HIMEM gives the top of memory so
PRINT HIMEM-TOP
will indicate how much space is left.
When you run the program the computer will need some space
to store variables so you cannot use up all the available
memory just with your program.
In a Model B computer Random Access Memory extends from
location 0 to location 32767 (in hexadecimal that is &7FFF). ram
is normally allocated in mode 7 as shown opposite.
As the user enters more program so the program grows,
increasing the value of TOP. Normally the computer stores
program variables immediately above the user program but
this can be changed by re-setting the variable LOMEM.
Again the computer normally expects to be able to use all the
memory up to that set aside for the screen, but the user may
move the position of the highest boundary by changing
HIMEM.
The variable TOP is calculated by the computer on request. It
does this by starting at PAGE and working through the
program. The user cannot reset the value of TOP but can reset
PAGE, HIMEM and LOMEM if needed for some special
purpose.

                              414
                               &7FFF   32767
        SCREEN MEMORY
HIMEM                          &7C00   31744

             SPARE

              VARIABLES FROM
               USER PROGRAM
LOMEM
TOP

         USER PROGRAM

PAGE
                               &0E00   3584
        SYSTEM VARIABLES

                               0

              415
