# 42. FX Calls and OSBYTE calls

42 FX Calls and
   OSBYTE calls

*FX and OSBYTE Call Summary
Decimal Hex    Function
*   0      0   Prints operating system version number
    1      1   Reserved for application programs
    2      2   Selects input device
    3      3   Selects output devices
*   4      4   Enable/disable cursor edit keys
*   5      5   Select printer type
*   6      6   Set Printer ignore character
*   7      7   Set RS423 receive baud rate
*   8      8   Set RS423 transmit baud rate
*   9      9   Set flash period of first colour
* 10      A    Set flash period of second colour
* 11       B   Set auto-repeat delay
* 12       C   Set auto-repeat period
   13     D    Disable various events
   14      E   Enable various events
* 15       F   Flush all or just input buffer
* 16      10   Select number of ADC channels
   17     11   Force start of conversion on ADC channel
   18     12   Reset user defined function keys
   19     13   Wait for field synchronization
   20     14   Explode soft character ram allocation
   21     15   Flush selected buffer
* 124    7C    Reset ESCAPE flag
* 125    7D    Set ESCAPE flag
* 126    7E    Acknowledge detection of ESCAPE condition
* 127    7F    Check end of file status
* 128     80   Read ADC channel/fire buttons/last
               conversion
* 129     81   Read key within time limit
* 130     82   Read machine high order address

                          418
Decimal Hex       Function
* 131     83      Read top of operating system ram Address
* 132     84      Read bottom of display ram address
* 133     85      Read lowest address for particular mode
* 134     86      Read text cursor position
* 135     87      Read character at text cursor position
  136     88      Reserved
* 137     89      Turn cassette motor ON/OFF
  138    8A       Insert character into keyboard buffer
* 139    8B       Set file options
* 140    8C       Select cassette file system and set speed
  141    8D       Reserved
  142    8E       Reserved
  143    8F       Reserved
* 144     90      Alter TV display position/interlace
  145     91      Remove character from buffer
  146     92      Read from I/O area FRED
  147     93      Write to I/O area FRED
  148     94      Read from I/O area JIM
  149     95      Write to I/O area JIM
  150     96      Read from I/O area SHEILA
  151     97      Write to I/O area SHEILA
  218      DA     Cancel VDU queue
  225       E1    Set base number for function-key codes
  226       E2    Set base number for SHIFT function-key codes
  227       E3    Set base number for CTRL function-key codes
  228       E4    Set base number for SHIFT/CTRL function key
                  codes
  229        E5 Escape=&1B
  230        E6 Enable/disable normal ESCAPE key action
  231        E7 Enable/disable user 6522 IRQ
  232        E8 Enable/disable 6850 ACIA IRQ
This sheet gives osbyte calls for issue 1.0.
Calls marked * are identical in issue 0.10. Those calls with no
mark are new to the issue 1.0.
The statement *FX is used to control a large number of the
computer’s “special effects”, for example the rate at which
“flashing colours” flash or to select whether an RS423 or a
parallel printer is to be used. For example, to select a parallel
printer and to copy all output to the printer one would use the
statements
                               419
10 *FX 5,1 selects parallel printer
20 VDU 2   copies all output to printer

Please note that not all the calls listed are available on
operating systems before “Issue 1.0”.
The FX calls are also easily available to those writing in
assembly language. In this case the same effect of selecting a
parallel printer and turning it on would be achieved by
    10    DIM DEMO 20
    20    OSBYTE=&FFF4
    30    OSWRCH=&FFEE
    40    P%=DEMO
    50    [
    60    LDA #5
    70    LDX #1
    80    JSR OSBYTE
    90    LDA #2
   100    JSR OSWRCH
   110    RTS
   120    ]
   300    CALL DEMO
>RUN
0EA4
0EA4    A9    05    LDA #5
0EA6    A2    01    LDX #1
0EA8    20    F4 FF JSR OSBYTE
0EAB    A9    02    LDA #2
0EAD    20    EE FF JSR OSWRCH
0EB0    60          RTS
Because this chapter is relevant to both those writing basic
programs and those writing in assembly language, a certain
amount of material has to be included that is only relevant to
those writing in assembler. The next section is a case in point; it
is only relevant to those programming in assembly language.
All FX calls are available in machine code. In general an FX call
in basic takes the form
*FX 137,0,1
In assembly language the general form is
LDA #137
                                420
LDX #0
LDY #1
JSR &FFF4
The first parameter (137) determines which FX call is to be used
and is placed in the accumulator. The second and third
parameters are optional but if used are placed on the X and Y
registers.
If omitted X and Y will be set to zero. Thus *FXa would set X
and Y to zero and *FXa,X would set Y=0.
Before using an osbyte call (JSR &FFF4) the 6502 must be in
binary mode. In general, after an osbyte call the registers and
flags will be undefined. Some osbyte calls return a value in X.
These are noted further on. osbyte calls with A in the range
&80 to &FF in general need to set both X and Y whereas other
osbyte calls only take one argument – in X.
As you may gather, the *FX statement merely takes the
parameters given, places them in A, X and Y and executes a call
to &FFF4.
Some FX statements return values in the X (and sometimes Y),
register. They can only be used by assembly language
programmers or by using the USR function in basic. For that
reason they are explained as osbyte calls rather than FX calls.
See section 43 (Assembly Language) for more information.
Each FX and osbyte call is now explained in detail.
*FX0 prints a message giving the version number of the
operating system.

*FX1 is reserved for user supplied routines in application
programs.

*FX2 selects the input device from which characters will be
fetched.
*FX2,0 get characters from the keyboard and disables the
RS423 receiver.
*FX2,1 gets characters from the RS423 port and disables the
keyboard.
*FX2,2 gets characters from the keyboard and enables the
RS423 receiver.
This call is not available in operating systems prior to issue 1.0.
                                421
*FX3 is used to select whether output appears (or not), on
three different output streams. In the table below screen refers
to the normal TV or monitor, RS423 refers to the RS423 socket
and Printer refers to the selected printer output which may be
either parallel or RS423.
The number following *FX3, will produce output on the
following devices
                        Printer         Screen         RS423
                        (bit 2)         (bit 1)        (bit 0)
*FX3,0                    P               P               x
*FX3,1                    P               P              P
*FX3,2                    P                x              x
*FX3,3                    P                x             P
*FX3,4                     x              P               x
*FX3,5                     x              P              P
*FX3,6                     x               x              x
*FX3,7                     x               x             P
Thus, to send output to the RS423 but not to the screen or
printer one would use *FX3,7
At machine code level bit 0 controls the RS423 stream, bit 1 the
vdu screen and bit 2 the printer. Note that bits 1 and 2 are
negative logic true so that *FX3,0 will select the printer and
screen outputs. This is the default setting.

*FX4,0 resets the system so that the cursor editing keys
          and COPY, perform their normal cursor editing
          function.
*FX4,1 disables the cursor editing and makes the cursor
editing keys generate normal ascii codes. The codes are shown
below in both decimal and hex. numbers.
COPY     135   &87
         136   &88
         137   &89
         138   &8A
         139   &8B

                                  422
*FX4,2 permits the                and COPY keys to be
programmed in the same way as the user-defined function
keys. In other words they may contain strings. In this case the
*KEY number are
COPY     11
         12
         13
         14
         15

This feature is only available from issue 1.0.

*FX5 is used to select the printer type.
*FX5,1 selects output to the parallel (Centronics® type)
output connector.
*FX5,2 selects the serial RS423 output.
*FX5,3 selects a user-supplied printer driver (see page 408).
Note that neither of these will actually cause output to appear
on the printer. VDU 2 (or CTRL B) must be used to start output
going to the selected printer channel.
*FX5,0 can be used to select a “printer sink” where
characters can be lost without the possibility of the system
“hanging” with a full printer buffer.

*FX6 is used to set the character which will be suppressed by
the printer driver routines. Some printers do an automatic “line
feed” when they receive a “carriage return”. It is therefore
useful to be able to prevent the “linefeed” characters from
reaching the printer. The ascii code for line feed is decimal
code 10 so this can be achieved with the statement
*FX6,10
Having set this mode it is still possible to get a line feed
through to the printer by use of VDU1 (send next character to
printer only) statement. The character following VDU1 is not
checked, thus to send a line feed one would use
VDU1,10

                               423
*FX6 should always be executed after the printer type has
been set by *FX5.
Note that the default is that line feed characters are filtered out.
*FX6,0 filters no characters.

*FX7 is used to select the baud rate to be used when receiving
data on the RS423 interface, as follows:
*FX7,1    75 baud receive
*FX7,2   150 baud receive
*FX7,3   300 baud receive
*FX7,4 1200 baud receive
*FX7,5 2400 baud receive
*FX7,6 4800 baud receive
*FX7,7 9600 baud receive
*FX7,8 19200 baud receive (This rate is not guaranteed)

*FX8 is used to select the transmit rate to be used on the
RS423 interface:
*FX8,1    75 baud transmit
*FX8,2   150 baud transmit
*FX8,3   300 baud transmit
*FX8,4 1200 baud transmit
*FX8,5 2400 baud transmit
*FX8,6 4800 baud transmit
*FX8,7 9600 baud transmit
*FX8,8 19200 baud transmit (This rate is not guaranteed)
Note: The standard receive/transmit format adopted for RS423
is a 1 start bit, 8 data bits, 1 stop bit.

*FX9 and *FX10 are used to set the flash rate of “flashing
colours”. Colours always flash between one colour and its
complement. Thus in mode 2, COLOUR 9 selects flashing
red-cyan. (See page 222 for more information on COLOUR.)
*FX9 is followed by a number which gives the duration of the
first named colour. The duration is given in fiftieths of a
second. Thus to select one-fifth of a second one would use the
statement
*FX9,10
The default is *FX9,25

                                424
*FX10 is used to set the period of the second named colour.
See the entry above for *FX9.
Note that values of 0 for the duration will eventually force the
selected state to occur fulltime. If neither counter is set to zero
then setting the other counter to zero will immediately force
the latter colour to appear.
The default is *FX10,25

*FX11 If a key is held depressed then after a short delay (the
auto-repeat delay), the key will repeat automatically every so
often. The delay is given in centi-seconds.
*FX11 sets the delay before the auto-repeat starts.
*FX11,0 turns off the auto-repeat all together.
*FX11,5 would set the auto-repeat delay to five hundredths
of a second, etc.

*FX12 sets the auto-repeat period, that is the amount of time
between the generation of each character.
*FX12,0 resets both the auto-repeat delay and the auto-
repeat to their normal values.
*FX12,10 would set the auto-repeat period to
ten-hundredths of a second thus producing ten characters per
second.

*FX13 and *FX14 are used to enable and disable certain
“events”. These FX calls will only be used by those writing in
assembly language and more information on “Events” is given
on page 464. The summary which follows should be read in
conjunction with that section.
*FX13,0 disable output buffer empty event.
*FX13,1 disable input buffer full event.
*FX13,2 disable character entering input buffer event.
*FX13,3 disable ADC conversion complete event.
*FX13,4 disable start of vertical sync. event.
*FX13,5 disable interval timer crossing zero event.
*FX13,6 disable ESCAPE pressed event.
These calls are only available from issue 1.0.

                                425
*FX14,0 enable output buffer empty event.
*FX14,1 enable input buffer full event.
*FX14,2 enable character entering input buffer event.
*FX14,3 enable ADC conversion complete event.
*FX14,4 enable start of vertical sync. event.
*FX14,5 enable interval timer crossing zero event.
*FX14,6 enable ESCAPE pressed event.
These calls are only available from issue 1.0.
The initial condition is that all are disabled.

*FX15 enables various internal buffers to be flushed (or
emptied).
*FX15,0 flushes all internal buffers.
*FX15,1 flushes the currently selected input buffer.
See also *FX21
As an osbyte call this typically executes in 370 micro-seconds
in release 1.0.

*FX16 is used to select the number of Analogue to Digital
Converter (ADC) channels that are to be used. Each ADC
channel takes 10ms to convert an analogue voltage into a
digital value. Thus if all four ADC channels are enabled then
new values for a particular channel will only be available every
40ms. It is, therefore, often wise to only enable the number of
channels actually required.
*FX16,0 will disable all ADC channels.
*FX16,1 will enable ADC channel 1 only.
*FX16,2 will enable channels 1 and 2.
*FX16,3 will enable channels 1, 2 and 3.
*FX16,4 will enable all four ADC channels.

*FX17 forces the ADC converter to start a conversion on the
selected channel. Thus *FX17,1 will start a conversion on
channel 1. Channels are numbered 1, 2, 3 and 4. osbyte call
with A=&80 can be used to determine when the conversion is
complete as can ADVAL(0).
This call is only implemented from issue 1.0.

                                426
*FX18 Resets the user defined function keys so that they no
longer contain character strings.
This call is only implemented from issue 1.0.
*FX19 Causes the machine to wait until the start of the next
frame of the display for animation. This call is only
implemented from issue 1.0.
*FX20 When the machine starts up, space is allocated at
&C00 for the re-definition of 32 displayed characters using the
VDU 23 statement.
In operating system 0.10 ascii characters 224 to 255 can be
redefined into this space. In operating system 1.0 a new
concept is introduced namely that of “exploding” the memory
allocation for user defined characters. What follows refers only
to version 1.0 but care has been taken to ensure upward
compatibility with operating system 0.10.
In the initial state, or after issuing a *FX20,0 command, the
character definitions are said to be “imploded”. This means
that an attempt to print any character with ascii code greater
than 128 (&80) will be mapped on to the characters stored at
memory &C00. Initially this will produce garbage. Once a user
defined character has been defined it will then appear at four
ascii positions due to this mapping. Thus ascii codes &80,
&A0, &C0 and &E0 will all show the same character.
Re-defining ascii code &E0 (224) will affect all four characters.
Codes between &20 and &7F can be re-defined but will map to
memory at &C00, thus overwriting what is already there.
After a *FX20,1 command the character definitions are said
to be “exploded” and all printing characters (codes &20 to &FF)
can be re-defined. However, until any character in a block is
re-defined, the block will map on to either the pre-set rom (&20
to &7F) or on to memory at &C00 (&80 to &FF). The memory
allocated to each block of ascii codes in the “exploded” state is
ASCII code Memory allocation
&20 to &3F       OSHWM + &300 to OSHWM + &3FF
&40 to &5F       OSHWM + &400 to OSHWM + &4FF
&60 to &7F       OSHWM + &500 to OSHWM + &5FF
&80 to &9F       &C00 to &CFF
&A0 to &BF OSHWM to OSHWM + &FF
&C0 to &DF OSHWM + &100 to OSHWM + &1FF
&E0 to &FF OSHWM + &200 to OSHWM + &2FF
                              427
Thus if the user re-defines characters in the range &20 to &3F
he must leave memory up to oshwm + &3FF clear of his
program. This is done by first finding the value of oshwm (for
the particular configuration in use) by using osbyte call 131
and when setting PAGE to a value &400 above this value. Of
course, if the user only wishes to re-define ascii codes in the
range &80 to &9F (128 to 159) then he need not alter PAGE.
Codes in the range &80 to &9F are of particular importance
since the user can generate them directly from the keyboard by
holding down SHIFT at the same time as pressing one of the
user definable function keys (issue 1.0 only).
See page 431 for more information on Operating System High
Water Mark.
*FX20 is only available from issue 1.0.

*FX21 This call allows any internal buffer to be emptied (or
flushed).
*FX21,0 flushes the keyboard buffer
*FX21,1 flushes the RS423 serial input buffer
*FX21,2 flushes the RS423 serial output buffer
*FX21,3 flushes the printer output buffer
*FX21,4 flushes the sound channel number 0 (noise)
*FX21,5 flushes the sound channel number 1
*FX21,6 flushes the sound channel number 2
*FX21,7 flushes the sound channel number 3
*FX21,8 flushes the speech synthesis buffer
See also *FX15 and osbyte &80
This call is only implemented from issue 1.0.

*FX124 Can be used to reset the ESCAPE pressed flag at
location &FF. It must not be set or reset directly.

*FX125 Sets the ESCAPE pressed flag. It must be set with
this call and not directly. It has a similar effect to pressing the
ESCAPE key. (Conditional on any osbyte 229 call.)

                                428
*FX126 Must be used to acknowledge the detection of an
“escape condition” if the user is intercepting characters fed into
the computer through the osrdch (Operating System Read
Character) routine.
OSBYTE calls
Most of the calls that follow can only be used in machine
code programs. They are therefore described in terms of an
osbyte call – that is, a JSR to location &FFF4. The call number is
passed in the A accumulator and the X and Y registers are used
to pass other values. Values are returned in X and/or Y. It is
however possible to use these calls from basic by using the
USR function, provided that the result is deposited in an
integer variable.
OSBYTE with A=&7F (127) (EOF#)
This call returns the end-of-file status of a file which has been
previously opened. On entry X should contain the channel
number allocated to the file. On exit X will be zero if the
end-of-file has not been reached and X will be non-zero if the
end-of-file has been reached.
OSBYTE with A=&80 (128) Read ADC channel
(ADVAL)
This call returns the most recent value of a particular Analogue
to Digital Converter channel. It can also be used to detect an
end of conversion and to see if the Games Fire buttons are
pressed.
On entry X contains the channel number to be read. If X is in
the range 1 to 4 then the specified channel will be read and on
exit the 16 bit value will be returned in X and Y. Y will contain
the 8 most significant bits and X the 8 least significant bits.
If on entry X=0 then on exit Y will contain a number in the
range 0 to 4 indicating which channel was the last to complete.
Note that *FX16 and *FX17 reset this value to 0. A value of
zero indicates that no channel has completed. Also on exit the
two least significant bits of X will indicate the status of the two
“fire buttons”. The user should always AND X with 3 to mask
out high order bits.
If on entry X contains a negative number (in 2’s complement
notation) then the call will provide information about various
input buffers. On entry Y must contain &FF.

                                429
X on entry     Buffer checked
255            keyboard buffer
254            RS423 serial input buffer
253            RS423 serial output buffer
252            printer output buffer
251            sound channel 0 (noise)
250            sound channel 1
249            sound channel 2
248            sound channel 3
247            speech buffer
On exit X contains a number giving, for input buffers, the
number of characters in the buffers. For output buffers X
contains the number of spaces still free in the buffer.

OSBYTE with A=&81 (129) Read key with time limit
The call waits for a character from the current input channel
until a time limit expires or it tests a particular key. The basic
function INKEY uses this call. The programmer is reminded
that this call will immediately obtain characters if the user has
“typed ahead”. It is, therefore, often necessary to flush the
input buffer with *FX15,1 before using this call.
The maximum time delay is passed to the subroutine in X and
Y. The delay is measured in centi-seconds and Y contains the
most significant byte and X the least significant byte. The
maximum delay is &7FFF centi-seconds which is about
five-and-a-half minutes.
On exit the Y=0 if a character was detected within the time
limit. In this case X contains the character. Y=&1B indicates that
ESCAPE was pressed. This must be acknowledged with
*FX126. Y=&FF indicates a time-out.
If on entry Y contains a negative number then the routine can
be used to check for a specific key closure. See the basic
keyword INKEY for more information.
As an osbyte call a “check for character waiting with zero
delay” takes typically 130 micro-seconds in release 1.0.

                                430
OSBYTE with A=&82 (130) Read machine higher
order address
The BBC computer uses a 6502 processor which requires a 16
bit address. However a number of routines require a 32 bit
address – for example most file system addresses are 32 bits
wide to ensure compatibility with future products. A specific
“high order address”, that is the top 16 bits of the total 32 bit
address, is allocated to the present BBC computer. This call
generates the high order address for each machine. The high
order address is returned in X and Y with Y containing the
most significant byte and X the least significant byte.

OSBYTE with A=&83 (131) Read top of O.S. RAM
address (OSHWM)
The Machine Operating System uses memory from page zero
up to store operating system variables. The exact amount of
ram needed depends, for example, on whether or not the disc
operating system is in use.
This call is used to return the address of the first free location in
memory above that required for the operating system. In a
cassette system this is normally &E00. The value is returned in
X and Y with Y containing the most significant byte and X
containing the least significant byte.
     10 A%=131
     30 PRINT ~USR(&FFF4)
>RUN
B10E0083
&0E00 is the value returned, &83 is the osbyte code.

OSBYTE with A=&84 (132) Read bottom of display
RAM address
This call returns, in X and Y, the lowest memory address used
by the screen display or by special paged roms. It indicates the
top of free ram that basic can safely use. HIMEM is normally
set to this value when using the MODE statement. Its value
depends, among other things, on the selected display mode
and on whether the machine has 16K or 32K of ram. As usual,
Y contains the most significant byte and X the least significant
byte of the result.

                                431
OSBYTE call with A=&85 (133) Read lowest address for
particular MODE
This call returns, in X and Y, the address of the start of memory
that would be set aside if a particular display mode were to be
selected. Certain paged roms might also affect the value
returned. The display mode to be investigated is passed in X.
This call does not change modes, it merely investigates the
possible consequences of changing mode.

OSBYTE call with A=&86 (134) Read text cursor position
This call returns in X and Y the X and Y co-ordinates of the text
cursor. A similar function is performed in basic by POS and
VPOS. As an osbyte call this takes typically 100 micro-seconds
in release 1.0.

OSBYTE call with A=&87 (135) Read character at text
cursor position
On exit X will contain the character at the text cursor’s position
and Y will contain a value representing the current graphics
display mode. If the character cannot be recognised then X will
contain zero.
The following function could be used to read the character at
position X, Y in a basic program.
 2000     DEF FNREADCH(X,Y)
 2010     LOCAL A%,LASTX,LASTY,C
 2020     LASTX=POS
 2030     LASTY=VPOS
 2040     VDU 31,X Y
 2050     A%=135
 2060     C=USR(&FFF4)
 2070     C=C AND &FFFF
 2080     C=C DIV &100
 2090     VDU 31,LASTX,LASTY
 2100     = CHR$(C)
The call is only implemented in version 1.0 and takes typically
120 micro-seconds.

                               432
OSBYTE call with A=&88 (136) Reserved

OSBYTE call with A=&89 (137) Motor control
This call is similar to the *MOTOR statement in basic. If only
one cassette recorder is in use then setting
X=0 will turn the motor off
X=1 will turn the motor on
The cassette filing system (CFS) controls the motor using this
osbyte call and in addition in version 1.0 it sets Y as follows
Y=0 for write operations
Y=1 for read operations.
As a result the user can easily implement a dual cassette system
by trapping any osbyte call with A=&89 and activating (via his
own hardware) the second recorder for, say, all write
operations. The normal internal motor control could then be
activated for all read operations.

OSBYTE call with A=&8A (138) Insert character into
keyboard buffer
This call enables characters to be inserted into the keyboard
buffer. On entry X=0 and Y contains the character to be
inserted. Thus to place the letter “R” (ascii code 82) into the
keyboard input buffer one would use
*FX138,0,82
In machine code the X register must contain the buffer number
and the Y register the character. e.g.
    10    DIM GAP 20
    20    OSBYTE=&FFF4
    30    P%=GAP
    40    [
    50    LDA #138
    60    LDX #0
    70    LDY #82
    80    JSR OSBYTE
    90    RTS
   100    ]
   110
   120    CALL GAP

                               433
>RUN
0E82
0E82    A9   8A         LDA   #138
0E84    A2   00         LDX   #0
0E86    A0   52         LDY   #82
0E88    20   F4 FF      JSR   OSBYTE
0E88    60   RTS
This is an extremely powerful facility! This call is only
implemented from release 1.0.

OSBYTE call with A=&8B (139) File Options
This call is directly equivalent to *OPT and it controls the
computer’s response to errors during file operations such as
LOAD and SAVE. See page 398 for more details.
For example, with the cassette filing system
*FX139,1,0 would issue no messages during file
operations
*FX139,2,2 would make the computer abort if any error
were detected
*FX139,3,5 would result in 0.5 second inter-block gaps
On entry X contains the option number and Y contains the
particular selected option. Thus
LDA    #139
LDX    #1
LDY    #0
JSR    &FFF4
would ensure that no error messages were issued during file
operations.

OSBYTE call with A=&8C (140) TAPE speed
This call is directly equivalent to *TAPE which selects the
cassette file system and the baud rate to be used. On entry X
contains a number to set the baud rate
X=0    default rate (1200 baud)
X=3    300 baud
X=12   1200 baud

                               434
OSBYTE call with A=&8D (141) Reserved

OSBYTE call with A=&8E (142) Reserved

OSBYTE call with A=&8F (143) Reserved

OSBYTE call with A=&90 (144) TV
This call is functionally equivalent to *TV. The contents of the
X register is used to control the vertical position of the screen
display. For example, setting X=2 would move the display 2
text lines up the screen. Setting X=253 would move the display
3 lines down the screen. The contents of Y should be either 0 or
1 on entry. Y=0 permits an interlaced display Y=1 causes a
non-interlaced display. Note that the offset and interlace mode
selected only come into effect at the next MODE change. The
values set stay in force until a hard reset. Interlace cannot be
turned off in mode 7.
OSBYTE call with A=&91 (145) Get character from
buffer
This call enables characters to be removed from various input
buffers. On entry X indicates the buffer from which the
character is to be extracted. On exit Y contains the character
and C=0 if a character was successfully removed. If the buffer
was empty then C will be 1. The buffer numbers are as follows
X=0    keyboard buffer
X=1    RS423 input buffer
OSBYTE calls with A=&92 to &97 Read or write to
memory mapped input/output
This group of calls is used to read or write data from or to the
various memory mapped input/output devices. It is vital that
users use these routines rather than attempting to address
devices directly. The use of these routines will ensure that
programs will work whether they are executed in the
input/output processor (the BBC computer), or in a second
processor. If the user insists on addressing I/O ports directly
(e.g. STA &FE60) then he or she will have to re-write
programs when the system is expanded. Considerable effort
has been expended to ensure that suitable routines are
provided to enable the assembly language programmer to
expand his system painlessly. Please learn to use the facilities
provided!
                               435
There are three memory mapped input/output areas and these
are named fred, jim and sheila. sheila contains all the
machine’s internal memory mapped devices, such as the
analogue to digital converter, and should be treated with
considerable respect. fred and jim, on the other hand, address
external units connected to the 1MHz expansion bus.
Name        Memory address range        OSBYTE call
                                        Read          Write
FRED        &FC00–&FCFF                 &92(146)      &93(147)
JIM         &FD00–&FDFF                 &94(148)      &95(149)
SHEILA      &FE00–&FEFF                 &96(150)      &97(151)
On entry to the routines A contains the osbyte call number and
X the offset within the page. If a byte is to be written it should
be in Y. The calls are not available before rom issue 1.0.
An application note entitled “BBC Computer 1MHz bus”
explains suggested memory allocations for fred and jim. It can
be purchased from Acorn Computers. sheila addresses the
devices with the offsets shown in the table on page 437.
The user should be aware that the computer expects to service
interrupts from all except the User port on the B side of the
6522. The A side is used for the parallel printer interface.
Routines are provided (such as osbyte and osword calls, etc.),
to handle these devices. The only circuit that the user should
need to handle directly is the 6522 User port. Information about
other ports is given for information only – not to encourage
you to access the circuits directly. You would be well advised
to use the numerous routines provided wherever possible.
Further details about some ports is given in the section which
deals with Input/Output. See page 467.

                               436
SHEILA addresses (offset from &FE00)
Hex.     Integrated   Register              Description
offset   Circuit      Designation   Write                 Read
00       6845 CRTC                  Address register
01       6845 CRTC                  Register file
08       6850 ACIA                  Control register      Status register
09       6850 ACIA                  Transmit data         Receive data register
                                      register
10       Serial ULA                 Control register
18       LS244        STATID                              Econet station no.
20       Video ULA
21       Video ULA
30       LS161                      Paged ROM I.D.
40       6522 VIA                   MOS Input/Output
60       6522 VIA     ORB/IRB       Output Register “B” Input Register “B”
61       6522 VIA     ORA/IRA       Output Register “A” Input Register “A”
62       6522 VIA     DDRB          Data Direction Register “B”
63       6522 VIA     DDRA          Data Direction Register “A”
64       6522 VIA     T1C-L         T1 Low-Order           T1 Low-Order
                                       Latches                Counter
65       6522 VIA     T1C-H         T1 High-Order Counter
66       6522 VIA     T1L-L         T1 Low-Order Latches
67       6522 VIA     T1L-H         T1 High-Order
                                       Latches
68       6522 VIA     T2C-L         T2 Low-Order           T2 Low-Order
                                       Latches                Counter
69       6522 VIA     T2C-H         T2 High-Order Counter
6A       6522 VIA     SR            Shift Register
6B       6522 VIA     ACR           Auxiliary Control Register
6C       6522 VIA     PCR           Peripheral Control Register
6D       6522 VIA     IFR           Interrupt Flag Register
6E       6522 VIA     IER           Interrupt Enable Register
6F       6522 VIA     ORA/IRA       Same as Reg 1 Except No “Handshake”
80       8271 FDC                   Command register       Status register
81       8271 FDC                   Parameter register     Result register
82       8271 FDC                   Reset register
83       8271 FDC                   Illegal                Illegal
84       8271 FDC                   Write data             Read data
A0       68B54 ADLC   CR1/SR1       Control register 1     Status register 1
A1       68B54 ADLC   CR2/SR2       Control register 2/3 Status register 2
A2       68B54 ADLC   TxFIFO/       Transmit FIFO,         Receive FIFO
                      RxFIFO           continue
A3       68B54 ADLC   TxFIFO/       Transmit FIFO,         Receive FIFO
                      RxFIFO           terminate
C0       µPD7002                    Data latch, A/D start Status
C1       ADC                                               High byte of result
C2

                                    437
A few examples will help to clarify the use of these calls.
*FX147,5,6
would write to fred+5 (&FC05) the value 6. Similarly
LDA    #&97
LDX    #&62
LDY    #&FF
JSR    &FFF4
would write &FF into location &FE62. An osbyte call with
A=&97 will write to sheila. The base address of sheila is
&FE00 and to this is added the offset in X (&62). The value
written is contained in Y. The net effect is to write to the 6522
Data direction register and to cause all the PB lines to become
outputs.

OSBYTE call with A=&DA (218) Cancel VDU queue
Many vdu codes expect a sequence of bytes. For example,
VDU19 should be followed by 5 bytes. This call signals the
vdu software to throw away the bytes that it has received so
far. On entry X and Y must contain zero.

The next group of OSBYTE calls (&E1 to &E8) can be used to
read or write status information. The calls read the current
value of the status being investigated, AND the value with the
contents of Y, EOR the result with the contents of X and then
write the value back. If V represents the particular status in the
computer then V becomes (V AND Y) EOR X. This sequence
enables V to read or written to and enables any single bit, or
group of bits of V, to be set, cleared or inverted.
If, on entry, X=&00 and Y=&FF the net effect will be to read the
value of V into X without altering V. On the other hand if
Y=&00 then the contents of X will be written into V. To set a
single bit of V without altering other bits set all the bits of Y to
1 except the specified bit. Clear all the bits of X to 0 except the
specified bit. For example, to set bit 0 of V to 1 use Y=&FE and
X=&01.
To clear a single bit in V set all the bits of Y to 1 except the
specified bit and set X=0. For example, to clear bit 0 of V use
Y=&FE and X=&00. Of course, many bits may be set, cleared,
inverted or examined at the same time.

                                438
OSBYTE call with A=&E1 (225) Set base number for
function-key codes
Normally the red function-keys can be programmed to
produce strings of characters by, for example, the statement
*KEY 0 PRINT
As an alternative the keys can produce a single ascii code. The
statement
*FX225,240
would set the base value for the function keys to 240 thus
causing key “f0” to produce ascii code 240, f1 to produce 241
and so on to f9 which would produce 249. This enables these
keys to produce ascii codes for user defined characters.
*FX225,1 returns the keys to their normal function of
generating strings.
*FX225,0 makes the keys have no effect.
On entry Y must contain zero.
This facility is only available from issue 1.0.

OSBYTE call with A=&E2 (226) Set base number for
SHIFT-function-key codes
Pressing one of the function keys while the SHIFT key is
pressed will normally in release 1.0 produce ascii codes in the
range 128 to 137. These values were chosen with the Teletext
codes in mind.
Shift-function-key       ASCII code        Teletext effect
        f0                  128            nothing
        f1                  129            Red alphanumeric
        f2                  130            Green alphanumeric
        f3                  131            Yellow alphanumeric
        f4                  132            Blue alphanumeric
        f5                  133            Magenta alphanumeric
        f6                  134            Cyan alphanumeric
        f7                  135            White alphanumeric
        f8                  136            Flash
        f9                  137            Steady
These codes are said to have a “base value” of 128 since key f0
produces a code 128.

                                439
If the user wishes, the base value of the ascii codes can be
changed by using this call.
*FX226,144
This would set the SHIFT-function-key codes to produce
equivalent graphics-colour Teletext codes. The default setting
is
*FX226,128
On entry Y must contain zero.
This facility is only available from release 1.0.
OSBYTE call with A=&E3 (227) Set base number for
CTRL-function-key codes
See the entry for OSBYTE &E2. The default base value is 144.
OSBYTE call with A=&E4 (228) Set base number for
SHIFT-CTRL-function-key codes
See entry for OSBYTE &E2. The default is that these key
combinations have no effect. Note: remember that pressing
CTRL and SHIFT together stops output to the screen going
into the next line.

OSBYTE call with A=&E5 (229) ESCAPE key gives
ASCII code
This call can be used to make the ESCAPE key generate an
ascii code (27 or &1B) instead of interrupting a basic program.
If X=0 then the ESCAPE key interrupts the basic program
(*FX229,0). On the other hand, *FX229,1 (X=1) causes
the key to generate its ascii code. On entry Y must contain
zero.
This facility is not available before issue 1.0.

OSBYTE call with A=&E6 (230) Enable/disable normal
ESCAPE Key action
When a basic program is interrupted by pressing the ESCAPE
key, or by *FX125, all internal buffers will be cleared. This
call can be used to stop the flushing of all internal buffers when
a program is stopped. On entry Y must contain zero.
*FX230,0 will permit all buffers to be flushed
*FX230,1 will ensure that no buffers are flushed
This facility is only available from issue 1.0.

                                440
OSBYTE call with A=&E7 (231) Enable/disable user 6522
IRQ
This call sets a “mask” byte which the operating system uses
when servicing IRQs which may have originated in the 6522
which is used for the parallel printer and user port. The
operating system ANDs the mask byte with the 6522 Interrupt
Flag Register AND the 6522 Interrupt Enable Register. Setting
the mask to zero would prevent the operating system from
handling the 6522 interrupts thus leaving them available to be
handled by user supplied routines. Additionally “Sideways
roms” may handle (via the operating system) interrupts
generated from the B side of the 6522. The mask byte could
hide those interrupts from the sideways roms.
In a Model A the mask byte defaults to &00 and in Model B
machines the default is &FF.
This facility is only available from issue 1.0.

OSBYTE call with A=&E8 (232) Enable/disable 6850
ACIA IRQ
This call sets a “mask” byte which is used by the operating
system when servicing IRQs which may have originated from
the 6850 ACIA used for the RS423 and cassette interfaces. The
operating system ANDs the mask byte with the 6850 status
register. See the entry above (osbyte &E7) for further
comments. The default value is &FF on both Model A and
Model B.
This facility is only available from issue 1.0.

                                441
