# 43. Assembly language

43 Assembly
   language
Why use an assembly language rather than basic?
basic is a relatively easy language to learn and another of its
great strengths is that when you make a mistake the computer
tries to give you some helpful message explaining what you
have done wrong – or what it is incapable of doing.
But there are prices to be paid for this “friendliness” and
sometimes one has to communicate with the computer in its
own language (machine code) or a low-level language like
assembly language – despite all the problems this can bring.
Assembly language consists of statements like
LDA #3
which means “Load the accumulator with 3” or
JSR &6000
which means “Jump to the subroutine at location 6000 hex”
An Assembler is a computer program which converts these
assembly language “mnemonics” into the machine code
numbers that the computer actually understands.
Assembly language is used where high speed is vital or where
the minimum amount of memory must be used. basic is used
where ease of programming is more important than either
speed or memory requirements. There are many other
computer languages each with their own strengths and
weaknesses.
It is unfortunately not possible, in a book this size, to teach you
to write in assembly language, even though the basic
interpreter contains an assembler. However those familiar with
6502 assembly language will need a good deal of information
to enable them to write effective programs. The rest of this
section explains, for those familiar with 6502 assembly, the
main features of the machine code access routines.
                               442
As the reader will be aware 16K of rom is set aside for the
Machine Operating System (mos). The mos looks after all
input/output and is accessed via a set of well defined entry
points, many of which are vectored via ram.
Access is provided to all graphics and text features including
mode selection, line drawing, text and graphic windowing,
redefinition of characters, 6845 crtc registers, flash rate
control.
Access is also provided to sound generation, clock set/read,
parallel/serial printer I/O, baud rate selection, adc results and
event completion flags.
The machine code programmer may select a different file
system (tape, disk or net) and may perform a wide range of file
input/output to the selected file system.
Considerable efforts have been made to give the assembly
language programmer access to entry points. Professional
programmers will understand the need to use the entry points
provided. These will remain static and will work in all
configurations. The assembler is part of the basic interpreter
and can be entered at any time by placing a left hand square
bracket [ as a basic statement. The end of the assembly
language section is indicated by a right hand square bracket ].
Note that in mode 7, the Teletext mode, these symbols are
displayed as left and right arrows f and g respectively.
     10   PRINT "THIS IS BASIC"
     20   [
     30   JSR &FFE7
     40   ]
(Do not try this program – it is incomplete and could prove
‘fatal’)!
In the example given the assembler has been given no
indication of where to store the assembled machine code. The
“program counter” is set by the variable P% and this can be set
to any desired value e.g.
     10   PRINT "THIS IS BASIC"
     15   P%=&7000
     20   [
     30   JSR &FFE7

                               443
    40 ]
    50 PRINT "AND THIS IS BASIC TOO"
>RUN
THIS IS BASIC
7000
7000 20 E7 FF JSR &FFE7
AND THIS IS BASIC TOO
However another, and much more useful, way is provided to
enable the programmer to allocate a few bytes of memory to a
piece of machine code. A special version of the DIM statement
is used.
    10   PRINT "THIS IS BASIC"
    15   DIM GAP% 20
    16   P%=GAP%
    20   [
    30   JSR &FFE7
    40   ]
    50   PRINT "AND THIS IS BASIC TOO"
>RUN
THIS IS BASIC
0E74
0E74 20 E7 FF JSR &FFE7
AND THIS IS BASIC TOO
The above program dynamically allocates a gap of 21 bytes and
the address of the start of the block is given in the variable
GAP%. This is the safe way of inserting machine code sections
into basic programs. Of course the actual location of the
routine will change if more basic statements are inserted in the
program before the DIM statement.
    10   PRINT "THIS IS BASIC"
    12   REM INSERT AN EXTRA LINE
    15   DIM GAP% 20
    16   P%=GAP%
    20   [
    30   JSR &FFE7
    40   ]
    50   PRINT "AND THIS IS BASIC TOO"

                              444
>RUN
THIS IS BASIC
0E8F
0E8F 20 E7 FF JSR &FFE7
AND THIS IS BASIC TOO
Two basic statements provide access to machine code routines:
CALL and USR. The USR statement provides an easy way of
passing values to and from the microprocessor’s registers
before and after the machine code call. When the statement
R = USR(Z)
is executed the computer first transfers values from the basic
variables X%, Y%, A% and C% into the processor’s X and Y
register, accumulator and carry flag respectively. Of course,
only the least significant byte of X%, Y% and A% can be used
and only the least significant bit of C% can be copied into the
carry flag.
After the various registers have been set up, control is passed
to the machine code subroutine (at address Z). This routine
must end with an RTS if control is to return to basic. On return
the A, X and Y registers and the program status register (P) are
used to produce a number which is placed in the basic
variable R.
This can be neatly illustrated by a short program which uses an
osbyte (Operating System Byte) call to determine the position
of the text cursor on the screen.
     30   A%=&86
     40   X%=0
     50   R=USR(&FFF4)
     60   PRINT ~R
Lines 30 and 40 ensure that the accumulator and X register will
be set up correctly. Line 50 obtains the result in R and line 60
prints the result in hexadecimal. A typical result would be
B1120086
B1 has come from the program status register (P)
12 from the Y register which gives the Y co-ordinate of the
   cursor
00 from the X register giving the X co-ordinate
86 from accumulator which was set up from A%

                               445
The CALL statement provides much more flexible access to
machine code routines. CALL does not return a calculated
result into a basic variable. However, the user can, if he or she
wishes, make any basic variable or group of variables available
to the machine code routine. If a list of basic variables follows
the CALL statement then a “parameter block” will be set up
starting at location &600. The sole purpose of this block is to let
a machine code routine know where variables are stored in
memory and what type each variable is.
The demonstration program which follows shows the use of
the CALL statement and also of the error handling features.
   10 REM Demonstration of CALL with a
parameter
   20 PROCINIT
   30 A%=&12345678
   40 CALL SWAP,A%
   50 PRINT~A%
   60 END
   70 DEF PROCINIT
   80 DIM Q% 100
   90 FOR C=0 TO 2 STEP 2
  100 PAR=&600: REM Parameter block
  110 ZP=&80: REM Usable zero page
  120 P%=Q%
  130 [OPT C
  140 .SWAP LDA PAR
  150 CMP#1:BEQ OK
  160 .ERRO BRK
  161 ]
  162 ?P%=45
  163 $(P%+1)="Swap Parameters"
  164 P%=P%+16
  170 [OPT C:BRK
  180 .OK LDA PAR+3:CMP #4:BNE ERRO
  190 LDA PAR+1:STA ZP
  200 LDA PAR+2:STA ZP+1
  210 LDY#3:LDX#0
  220 LDA(ZP,X):PHA:LDA(ZP),Y:
STA(ZP,X):PLA:STA(ZP),Y
  230 RTS
  240 ] NEXT
  250 ENDPROC
                               446
Lines 10 to 60 form the main basic program. This uses a
machine code program to swap parts of an integer number
around. Line 20 calls a procedure which assembles a piece of
machine code. Line 30 sets A% to some arbitrary value and
then line 40 calls the machine code subroutine to swap A%
around. Line 50 shows A% after it has been “vandalised”.
The procedure itself (lines 70 to 250) assembles the assembly
language mnemonics into machine code. Line 80 tells the
computer to allocate 101 bytes of memory and to set Q% to the
address of the memory allocated. Lines 90 and 240 form a
FOR...NEXT loop which makes the computer assemble the
code twice – the first pass to work out the addresses of the
labels, and the second pass to put them into code. Line 120 sets
the program counter at the start of each of the two passes.
Lines 140 and 150 check to see that the value in location &600 is
1. Location &600 contains the “number of parameters” and our
machine code routine is only meant to have one parameter. See
page 214 for information about parameter passing from CALL.
If location &600 does not contain 1 then control will pass to the
routine labelled ERRO (line 160).
This routine shows how a user supplied routine can produce
standard basic error messages and error numbers. This is
explained further on page 464. Suffice it to say that here the
code will generate basic error number 45 (a new one) and will
issue the message Swap Parameters before returning
control to basic. Line 164 increments the internal program
counter enough to allow space for the messages etc.
Line 170 re-enters normal assembler operation and re-sets the
OPT. Line 180 checks to see that the parameter is of type 4 (an
integer variable – see page 66) and if not reports an error.
Lines 190 to 220 perform the actual swap and line 230 ensures
an orderly return to basic.

The BASIC assembler
The assembler is entered with a statement starting with [ and
exited with ]. In Teletext mode these characters are displayed
as ‘arrow left’ and ‘arrow right’. In the assembly language
section the pseudo-operation OPT can be used to control
listing and error reporting. See the keyword OPT for more
details, in brief:

                              447
OPT 0 gives no errors and no listing
OPT 1 gives no errors and a listing
OPT 2 reports errors but gives no listing
OPT 3 reports errors and gives a listing.
Normally the “first pass” should be with OPT 0 and the
“second pass” with OPT 2. If a listing is required then the
“second pass” should be OPT 3.
Labels are defined by preceding them with a full stop. No full
stop is required when they are referenced.
      LDA #8
.LOOP BIT VIA+&D
      BNE LOOP
Labels are normal basic variable names. Thus they should start
with a letter and not start with a reserved word. During the
“first pass” unknown labels will generate an address of the
current op-code. Thus JMP and branch instructions will jump
or branch to themselves.
To enter byte or string constants the programmer should
leave the assembler temporarily and use indirection operators.
For example
JMP LABEL1
]
$P%="TODAY"
P%=P%+6
[
.LABEL1 LDA&
Remembering that the basic variable P% is used to store the
value of the program counter, the string indirection operator
($) can be used to insert ascii characters directly into memory.
The word TODAY will be copied to memory followed by a
carriage-return (&0D), a total of 6 characters. If you wish to
follow the word by a byte containing zero instead of &0D you
could write
$P%="TODAY"
P%?5=0
P%=P%+6
To insert numeric values directly into memory you can use
byte or word indirection operators:

                              448
JMP LABEL2
]
?P%=10
P%?1=20
P%?2=66
P%=P%+3
[
The various 6502 addressing modes are indicated in assembly
language in the standard way, but using an ampersand to
represent a hexadecimal number.
Addressing mode          Examples
Immediate                LDA #4                LDA #VALUE
Absolute                 JMP &8000             LDA LOCATION
Zero page                LDA &FC               STY TEMPI
Accumulator              ASL A
Implied                  RTS
Pre-indexed indirect     LDA (5,X)             CMP    (OFFSET,X)
Post-indexed indirect    LDA (&84),Y           ORA    (TABLE),Y
Zero page X              LDA 10,X              INC    CNT,X
Absolute X               LDA &1234,X           STA    STORE,X
Relative                 BNE &3210             BNE    LOOP3
Indirect                 JMP (&20E)            JMP    (WRCHV)
Zero page indexed
  with Y                 LDX 24,Y              LDX VAR,Y

Comments can be inserted into assembly language by
preceding them with a backslash. On the keyboard and in
modes 0 to 6 this is shown as \ whereas in Teletext mode it is
displayed as one-half (½). In basic everything after a REM
statement is ignored on the current line so it is not possible to
put another statement on the same line. Thus
     10 REM HELLO : PRINT "FRIDAY"
would not print the word FRIDAY. However, in assembly
language a comment terminates at the end of the statement. All
the following statements would be assembled
LDA #&10 \MASK :.LOOP BIT VIA+13
\INTERRUPT FLAG :BEQ LOOP

                               449
Machine code entry points
The BBC computer is unusual in a number of respects, not least
because of the care taken to ensure that everything that can be
done by programs written in the “Input/Output processor”
(the BBC computer) can also be done in the “second processor”
which is on the far side of the Tube®.
If a piece of machine code alters a particular memory location
that controls the screen display directly, then that same piece of
machine code will not work in the second processor because
the screen will not be affected by the memory location in the
second processor.
It is vital that programmers avoid reading and writing to
specific memory locations such as the screen memory, zero
page locations used by basic and memory mapped
input/output devices. System calls are provided to enable you
to access all these important locations and use of these system
calls will ensure that your programs interact successfully with
the machine. Don’t feel that we are trying to hide anything
from you, on the contrary we are offering you access to all the
I/O routines that basic uses! Cultivate the habit of using
system calls and then you will not need to re-write your code
when you move it to the second processor.

The operating system calls
Machine code user programs should communicate with the
operating system by calling routines in the address range
&FF00 to &FFFF. These routines then call a specific internal
routine whose address may change in different operating
systems. The address of the specific routine is held in ram
between locations &200 and &2FF. The user may change the
address held in these ram locations to intercept any operating
system call he wishes.
Thus the “output the character in A” routine is entered at
&FFEE in all environments. The routine indirects through
location &20E in all machines. The contents of locations &20E
and &20F will vary depending on the machine and the version
of the operating system. In one particular machine the address
in &20E and &20F is &E1DC which is the local internal address
of the normal “output character in A” routine.

                               450
Parameters are passed to the routines in various ways using
either the 6502 A, X and Y registers, zero page locations or a
parameter block. All routines should be called with a JSR and
with the decimal flag clear (i.e. in binary mode).
In the detailed descriptions which follow A refers to the
accumulator, X and Y refer to the registers,
C, D, N, V, and Z refer to the processor flags.
On page 452 is a summary of operating system calls and
indirection vectors.
FILES
Files are treated as a sequence of 8 bit bytes. They can be
accessed in one operation (using osfile) or in blocks (using
osgbpb) or a byte at a time (using osbget and osbput). The
following attributes may be associated with each file.
Load address is the address in memory to which the file should
normally be loaded. This can be over-ridden when the file is
loaded, if necessary.
Execution address is meaningful only if the file contains
executable machine code, in which case it is the address where
execution should start. If the file contains a high level language
program then the execution address in unimportant.
Length is the total number of bytes in the file. It may be zero.
Pointer is an index pointing to the next byte of data that is to be
processed. The value of “Pointer” may be read or written
(using osargs), and it does not indicate whether the
appropriate byte has yet been transferred from file to memory
or vice versa. Pointer is automatically updated by osbget and
osbput.

OSFIND
Opens a file for writing or reading and writing. The routine is
entered at &FFCE and indirects via &21C. The value in A
determines the type of operation.
A=0       causes a file or files to be closed.
A=&40     causes a file to be opened for input (reading).
A=&80     causes a file to be opened for output (writing).
A=&C0     causes a file to be opened for input and output
          (random access).

                               451
   Routine          Vector       Summary of function
Name   Address   Name Address

                 UPTV      222   User print routine
                 EVNTV     220   Event interrupt
                 FSCV      21E   File system control entry
OSFIND   FFCE    FINDV     21C   Open or close a file
OSGBPB   FFD1    GBPBV     21A   Load or save a block of
                                 memory to a file
OSBPUT   FFD4    BPUTV     218   Save a single byte to file
                                 from A
OSBGET   FFD7    BGETV     216   Load a single byte to A
                                 from file
OSARGS   FFDA ARGSV        214   Load or save data about
                                 a file
OSFILE   FFDD FILEV        212   Load or save a complete
                                 file
OSRDCH   FFE0    RDCHV     210   Read character (from
                                 keyboard) to A
OSASCI   FFE3      —       —     Write a character (to
                                 screen) from A plus LF if
                                 (A)=&0D
OSNEWL   FFE7      —       —     Write LF,CR (&0A,&0D)
                                 to screen
OSWRCH   FFEE    WRCHV     20E   Write character (to
                                 screen) from A
OSWORD   FFF1    WORDV     20C   Perform miscellaneous
                                 OS operation using
                                 control block to pass
                                 parameters
OSBYTE   FFF4    BYTEV     20A   Perform miscellaneous
                                 OS operation using
                                 registers to pass
                                 parameters
OSCLI    FFF7    CLIV      208   Interpret the command
                                 line given
                 IRQ2V     206   Unrecognised IRQ
                                 vector
                 IRQ1V     204   All IRQ vector
                 BRKV      202   Break vector
                 USERV     200   Reserved

                         452
If A=&40, &80 or &C0 then Y (high byte) and X (low byte) must
contain the address of a location in memory which contains the
file name terminated with CR (&0D). On exit A will contain the
channel number allocated to the file for all future operations. If
Y=0 then the operating system was unable to open the file.
If A=0 then a file, or all files, will be closed depending on the
value of Y. Y=0 will close all files, otherwise the file whose
channel number is given in Y will be closed.
On exit C, N, V and Z are undefined and D=0. The interrupt
state is preserved, however interrupts may be enabled during
the operation.

OSGBPB
The operating system call to get or put a block of bytes to a file
which has been opened with osfind. The routine is entered at
&FFD1 and vectors via &21A. It is not available on cassette
systems, and is documented with the disc system.

OSBPUT
Writes (puts) a byte in A to the file previously opened using
osfind. The routine is entered at &FFD4 which indirects
through &218. On entry Y contains the channel number
allocated by osfind.
On exit A, X and Y are preserved, N, V and Z are undefined
and D=0. The interrupt state is preserved but interrupts may be
enabled during the operation.

OSBGET
Gets (reads) a byte from a file into A. The file must have been
previously opened using osfind and the channel number
allocated must be in Y. The routine is entered at &FFD7 which
indirects via &216.
On exit C=0 indicates a valid character in A. C=1 indicates an
error and A indicates the type of error, A=&FE indicating an
end-of-file condition. X and Y are preserved, N, V and Z are
undefined and D=0. The interrupt state is preserved but
interrupts may be enabled during the operation.

                                453
OSARGS
This routine enables a file’s attributes to be read from file or
written to file. The routine is entered at &FFDA and indirects
via &214. On entry X must point to four locations in zero page
and Y contains the channel number.
If Y is non-zero then A will determine the function to be carried
out on the file whose channel number is in Y.
A=0       read sequential pointer
A=1       write sequential pointer
A=2       read length
A=&FF     “ensure” that this file is up to date on the media
If Y is zero then the contents of A will determine the function to
be carried out.
A=0       will return, in A, the type of file system in use. The
          value of A on exit has the following significance
          0 no file system
          1 1200 baud cassette file system
          2 300 baud cassette file system
          3 rom pack file system
          4 Disc file system
          5 Econet file system
          6 Teletext/Prestel Telesoftware file system
A=1       return address of the rest of the command line in the
          zero page locations
A=&FF “ensure” that all open files are up to date on the
      media.
On exit X and Y are preserved, C, N, V and Z are undefined
and D=0. The interrupt state is preserved but interrupts may be
enabled during the operation.

OSFILE
This routine, by itself, allows a whole file to be loaded or saved.
The routine is entered at &FFDD and indirects via &212.
On entry A indicates the function to be performed. X and Y
point to an 18 byte control block anywhere in memory. X
contains the low byte of the control block address and Y the
high byte. The control block is structured as follows from the
base address given by X and Y.

                               454
OSFILE control block

00 Address of file name, which must be terminated            LSB
01 by &0D                                                    MSB
02 Load address of file                                      LSB
03
04
05                                                           MSB
06 Execution address of file.                                LSB
07
08
09                                                           MSB
0A Start address of data for write operations,               LSB
0B or length of file for read operations
0C
0D                                                           MSB
0E End address of data, that is byte after                   LSB
0F last byte to be written or file attributes.
10
11                                                           MSB

The table below indicates the function performed by osfile for
each value of A.
A=0       Save a section of memory as a named file. The file’s
          catalogue information is also written
A=1       Write the catalogue information for the named file
A=2       Write the load address (only) for the named file
A=3       Write the execution address (only) for the named file
A=4       Write the attributes (only) for the named file
A=5       Read the named file’s catalogue information. Place
          the file type in A
A=6       Delete the named file
A=&FF Load the named file and read the named file’s
      catalogue information

                                455
When loading a file the byte at XY+6 (the LSB of the execution
address), determines where the file will be loaded in memory.
If it is zero then the file will be loaded to the address given in
the control block. If non-zero then the file will be loaded to the
address stored with the file when it was created.
The file attributes are stored in four bytes. The least significant
8 bits have the following meanings
Bit    Meaning
0      readable by you                         (DFS only uses
1      writable by you                          bit 3: file locked)
2      executable by you
3      not deletable by you
4      readable by others
5      writable by others
6      executable by others
7      not deletable by others
File types are as follows
0      nothing found
1      file found
2      directory found
A BRK will occur in the event of an error and this can be
trapped if required. See page 464 which deals with BRK
handling.
On exit X and Y are preserved, C, N, V and Z are undefined
and D=0. The interrupt state is preserved but interrupts may be
enabled during the operation.

OSRDCH
This routine reads a character from the currently selected input
stream into A. The routine is called at location &FFE0 and
indirects via &210. The input stream can be selected by an
osbyte call with A=2. See page 421.
On exit C=0 indicates a successful read and the character will
be in A. C=1 indicates an error and the error type is returned in
A. If C=1 and A=&1B then an escape condition has been
detected and the user must at least acknowledge this by
performing an osbyte call with A=&7E; basic will normally do
this for you. X and Y are preserved, N, V and Z are undefined
and D=0. The interrupt state is preserved.

                                456
OSASCI
This routine writes the character in A to the currently selected
output stream by using oswrch. However, if A contains &0D
then osnewl is called instead. The actual code at location
&FFE3 is
FFE3        C9     0D          OSASCI            CMP    #&0D
FFE5        D0     07                            BNE    OSWRCH
FFE7        A9     0A          OSNEWL            LDA    #&0A
FFE9        20     EEFF                          JSR    OSWRCH
FFEC        A9     0D                            LDA    #&0D
FFEE        6C     0E02        OSWRCH            JMP    (WRCHV)
On exit A, X and Y are preserved, C, N, V and Z are undefined
and D=0. The interrupt state is preserved.

OSNEWL
This call issues a LF CR (line feed, carriage return), to the
currently selected output stream. The routine is entered at
&FFE7.
On exit X and Y are preserved, C, N, V and Z are undefined
and D=0. The interrupt state is preserved.

OSWRCH
This call writes the character in A to the currently selected
output stream. The output stream may be changed using an
osbyte call with A=3. See page 422 for more details. oswrch is
entered at location &FFEE and indirects via &20E.
On exit A, X and Y are preserved, C, N, V and Z are undefined
and D=0. The interrupt state is preserved but interrupts may be
enabled during the operation.
All character output from basic, the operating system and
anything else uses this routine. It is, therefore, easy to pass all
output to a user provided output routine by placing the
address of the user routine at WRCHV (&20E). However, the
user should note that all control characters have special
significance. For example, &1C is followed by 4 bytes which
defines a text window. See the section on vdu codes for a
complete listing of control characters. If the user wishes to
intercept any control characters then his or her routine must
check for all control characters. The routine must arrange to

                                457
skip however many bytes follow a particular code since these
bytes might, inadvertently, contain a control code. For
example, the basic statement
GCOL 1,3
is passed to the operating system as a string of bytes through
oswrch. In fact, in this case the bytes would be &12,1,3.

OSWORD
The osword routine invokes a number of miscellaneous
operations all of which require more parameters or produce
more results than can be passed in A, X and Y. As a result, all
osword calls use a parameter block somewhere in memory.
The exact location of the parameter block is given in X (low
byte) and Y (high byte). The contents of A determine the exact
nature of the osword call.
All osword calls are entered at location &FFF1 which indirects
through &20C. The table below summarises the osword calls
available in release 1.0 of the operating system.

OSWORD summary

A=     Summary of function
0      Read a line from the current input stream to memory
1      Read the elapsed-time clock
2      Write the elapsed-time clock
3      Read internal timer
4      Write internal timer
5      Read a byte in the input/output processor memory
6      Write a byte in the input/output processor memory
7      Generate a sound
8      Define an envelope for use with the sound statement
9      Read pixel colour at screen position X, Y
A      Read dot pattern of a specific displayable character
B      Read the palette value for a given logical colour

                              458
OSWORD with A=0
This routine accepts characters from the current input stream
and places them at a specified location in memory. During
input the DELETE code (ascii 127) deletes the last character
entered, and CTRL U (ascii 21) deletes the entire line. The
routine ends if RETURN is entered (ascii 13) or an ESCAPE
condition occurs.

The control block contains 5 bytes

  00   Address of buffer for input line                    LSB
  01                                                       MSB
  02   Maximum length of line
  03   Minimum acceptable ascii value
  04   Maximum acceptable ascii value

Characters will only be entered if they are in the range
specified by XY+3 and XY+4.
On exit C=0 indicates that RETURN (CR; ascii code 13 or &D),
ended the line. C not equal to zero indicates that an escape
condition terminated entry. Y is set to the length of the line,
excluding the CR if C=0.

OSWORD call with A=1            Read clock
This call is used to read the internal elapsed-time clock into the
5 bytes pointed to by X and Y. This clock is the one used by
basic for its TIME function. The elapsed-time clock is reset to
zero when the computer is switched on and if a hard-reset is
executed. Otherwise it is incremented every hundredth of a
second. The only thing that will cause it to lose time is pressing
the BREAK key and keeping it pressed.
On entry X and Y should point to the memory locations where
the result is to be stored. Y contains the high byte and X the low
byte of the address.
On exit X and Y are undefined and the time is given in location
XY (lsb) to XY+4 (msb). The time is stored in pure binary.

                               459
OSWORD call with A=2             Write clock
This call is used to set the internal elapsed-time clock from the
5 bytes pointed to by XY.
On entry X and Y should point to the memory locations where
the new time is stored. Y contains the high byte and X the low
byte of the address. The least significant byte of the time is
stored at the address pointed to by XY and the most significant
byte of the time is stored at address XY+4. A total of 5 bytes are
required.

OSWORD call with A=3            Read interval timer
In addition to the clock there is an interval timer which is
incremented every hundredth of a second. The interval is
stored in 5 bytes pointed to by X and Y. See osword with A=1.

OSWORD call with A=4           Write interval timer
On entry X and Y point to 5 locations which contain the new
value to which the clock is to be set. The interval timer
increments and may cause an event (see page 464) when it
reaches zero. Thus setting the timer to &FFFFFFFFFE would
cause an event after 2 hundredths of a second.

OSWORD call with A=5         Read I/O processor memory
This call enables any program to read a byte in the I/O
processor no matter in which processor the program is
executing.
On entry X and Y point to a block of memory as follows
XY        LSB of address to be read
XY+1
XY+2
XY+3      MSB of address to be read
On exit the 8 bit byte will be stored in XY+4.

OSWORD call with A=6          Write to I/O processor memory
As pointed out elsewhere, programs that are to work through
the Tube® must not attempt to access memory locations in the
I/O processor directly. This call provides easy access to
locations in the BBC Microcomputer wherever the user’s
program happens to be.

                               460
On entry X and Y point to a block of memory initialised as
follows:
XY       LSB of address to be changed
XY+1
XY+2
XY+3     MSB of address to be changed
XY+4     byte to be entered at address given

OSWORD call with A=7          Make a sound
This call can be used to generate a sound. The 8 bytes pointed
to by locations XY to XY+7 are treated as four 2-byte values.
These four values determine the sound effect. See the keyword
SOUND for a detailed description.

XY         channel        LSB           1      01
XY+1                      MSB                  00
XY+2       amplitude      LSB           -15    F1
XY+3                      MSB                  FF
XY+4       pitch          LSB           200    C8
XY+5                      MSB                  00
XY+6       duration       LSB           20     14
XY+7                      MSB                  00

The example figures on the right of the table show first the
required decimal value and secondly the 2 hexadecimal values
required. The figures are only illustrative.
On exit X and Y are undefined.

OSWORD call with A=8            Define an envelope
This call is used to define an envelope which can be used by a
SOUND statement or equivalent osword call. On entry X and
Y point to an address in memory where 14 bytes of data are
stored. Y contains the high part of the address and X the low
part. The envelope number is stored at XY and the following 13
locations contain data for that envelope. See the entry for the
ENVELOPE keyword for more details.
On exit X and Y are undefined.

                             461
OSWORD call with A=9             Read a pixel
This call enables the machine code programmer to read the
status of a graphics point at any specified location. On entry X
and Y point to a block of 5 bytes. Y contains the most significant
byte of the address and X the least significant byte. On entry
the first four bytes are set up thus:
XY        LSB of X co-ordinate
XY+1      MSB of X co-ordinate
XY+2      LSB of Y co-ordinate
XY+3      MSB of Y co-ordinate
On exit XY+4 contains the logical colour of the point or &FF if
the point is off the screen. X and Y are undefined.

OSWORD call with A=&0A              Read character definition
Characters are displayed on the screen as an 8 by 8 matrix of
dots. The pattern of dots for each character in modes 0 to 6,
including user-defined characters, is stored as 8 bytes (see page
384). This call enables the 8 bytes to be read into a block of
memory starting at an address given in X and Y.
On entry the ascii code of the character is the first entry on the
block.
On exit the block contains data as shown below. X and Y are
undefined.
XY        Character required
XY+1      Top row of displayed character
XY+2      Second row
…
XY+8      Bottom row of displayed character

OSWORD call with A=&0B            Read palette
The reader will be aware that each logical colour (0 to 15) has a
physical (or displayed) colour associated with it. The physical
to logical association can be changed with VDU 19. This
osword call enables one to determine the physical colour
currently assigned to each logical colour.
On entry the X and Y registers contain the address of the start
of a block of 5 bytes.
The first byte should contain a value representing the logical
colour.
                               462
On exit the following four bytes will contain the same four
numbers used when VDU 19 assigned a physical colour to the
same logical colour. Suppose that logical colour 2 was in fact
set to blue (4) by the statement
VDU 19,2,4,0,0,0
then this call would produce the following result:
XY       2         logical colour
XY+1     4         physical colour (blue)
XY+2     0
XY+3     0         padding zeroes for future
XY+4     0         expansion

Command Line Interpreter (&FFF7)
The machine operating system CLI is usually accessed from a
high level language by starting a statement with an asterisk.
For example:
*MOTOR 0,1
The command line itself (excluding the asterisk) is then passed,
without any further processing, to the CLI.
Machine code programs can use all operating system
commands by placing the address of a command line in the
X (LSB) and Y (MSB) registers and calling &FFF7. This routine
indirects through location &208.
The command line should not start with an asterisk and must
end with an &0D. In fact any leading asterisk or spaces will be
stripped.
The following basic program illustrates this:
    10   DIM C 20
    20   $C="MOTOR 1"
    30   X%=C MOD 256
    40   Y%=C DIV 256
    50   CALL &FFF7
When RUN the cassette motor will turn on. The computer will
have allocated a space for C – perhaps at location &E0A in
which case successive bytes would contain:

                              463
Address            Contents
& E0A              4D                  (M)
& E0B              4F                  (O)
& E0C              54                  (T)
& E0D              4F                  (O)
& E0E              52                  (R)
& E0F              20                  (space)
& E10              31                  (1)
& E11              0D                  (return)
Of course, this particular example would have been easier as an
FX call or simply as *MOTOR 1. However, complex
commands may need this call.

Faults, Events and BRK handling
It is necessary to provide some means to enable programs to
deal with faults such as Illegal command or Division
by zero. basic uses the 6502 BRK instruction when dealing
with faults like this and user written programs can also use the
same facility. In basic (for example), a BRK instruction is
followed by a sequence of bytes giving the following
information:
BRK instruction – value &00
Fault number
Fault message – may contain any non-zero character
&00 to terminate message
When the 6502 encounters a BRK instruction the operating
system places the address following the BRK instruction in
locations &FD and &FE. Thus these locations point to the
“Fault number”. The operating system then indirects via
location &202. In other words control is transferred to a routine
whose address is given in locations &202 (low byte) and &203
(high byte). The default routine, whose address is given at the
location, prints the fault message.
The BRK handling outline above enables the user to intercept
normal procedures and to generate his or her own special
messages and error numbers in user written machine code
routines. The program on page 446 shows this in practice. See
also page 466 (IRQ).

                              464
Whilst faults are, in general, “fatal”, there is another class of
events, called “Events”, which are informative rather than fatal.
This class of events includes, for example, a key being pressed
on the keyboard. The user may wish to detect such an
operation or may be happy to ignore it. When the operating
system detects an “Event” then, if that event is enabled (by
using *FX14) it indirects via &220 with an event code in the
accumulator. The contents of X and Y depend on the event. The
event codes in A indicate the following:
Accumulator description
0   Buffer empty        X=buffer identity
1   Buffer full         X=buffer identity
                        Y=character that could not be stored
2   Keyboard interrupt
3   ADC conversion complete
4   Start of TV field pulse (vertical sync)
5   Interval timer crossing zero
6   Escape condition detected
The user supplied event handling routine is entered with
interrupts disabled and it should not enable interrupts. The
routine should return (RTS) after a short period, say one
millisecond maximum, and should preserve the processor’s
P, A, X and Y registers.

Interrupt Handling
The whole machine runs under continuous interrupts but
nonetheless the user can easily add his or her own interrupts
and handling routines. Because the machine runs under
interrupts, software timing loops should not be used. Several
hardware timers are available to the user and these should be
used wherever possible.

NMI Non-Maskable Interrupt
In general these should be avoided. When a disc operating
system rom is fitted NMI’s will be handled by the rom. Again,
it should be emphasised that NMI is reserved for the Operating
System.

                              465
IRQ Interrupt Request
When an IRQ is detected the operating system immediately
indirects through location &204 (IRQ1V) to an operating
system routine which handles all anticipated internal IRQ’s. If
the operating system is unable to deal with the IRQ (because it
has come from an unexpected device such as the user 6522),
then the system indirects through &206 (IRQ2V). Thus the user
routine for handling IRQ’s should normally be indirected via
IRQ2V but if top priority is required the user routine can be
indirected via IRQ1V.
In either case the user supplied routine must return control to
the operating system routine to ensure clean handling.
The operating system handles BRK and IRQ’s with the
following code

       STA     &FC             \ temporary for A
       PLA
       PHA                     \ get processor status
       AND     #&10
       BNE     BRK
       JMP     (&0204)         \ IRQ1V
.BRK   TXA                     \ BRK handling
       PHA                     \ save X
       TSX
       LDA     &103,X          \ get address low
       CLD
       SEC
       SBC     #1
       STA     &FD
       LDA     &104,X          \ get address high
       SBC     #0
       STA     &FE

Note that A is stored in location &FC so that it can be accessed
by user routines. When the computer indirects through &202
(BRKV), &204 (IRQ1V) and &206 (IRQ2V) X and Y will contain
correct values. The user must not enable interrupts during his or
her IRQ service routine.
This facility is only available from release 1.0.

                                466
