# 44. Analogue input

44 Analogue input

Model B computers are fitted with a socket at the back marked
“analogue in”. Into this socket you can plug “games paddles”
and “joy-sticks” as well as voltages which the computer can
measure. Games paddles usually consist of a box with a knob
like a record player volume control. The computer can tell the
position of the games paddle and so it can be used in games
and more serious programs, for example, to move things
around the screen. Joy-sticks, on the other hand, can be moved
left and right as well as up and down. As a result you can
move an object anywhere on the screen not just up and down a
particular line. Both games paddles and joy-sticks can be fitted
with push buttons and the computer can detect when these
buttons are pressed. The BBC computer can be connected to 4
games paddles or 2 joy-sticks. The basic function ADVAL can
be used to detect the position of each control and of the fire
buttons.
A second use for the analogue input is to measure voltages.
Each of the four inputs can accept voltages in the range 0 to
1.8V and will produce a corresponding number in the range 0
to 65520. Since it is possible to use a “transducer” to produce a
voltage proportional to temperature, light intensity, smoke
density, water pressure, gas concentration etc. it is possible to
use the computer to monitor all these things. If the unit is to be
used to measure absolute voltages then it should be calibrated
individually. In practice 1.0V input typically produces a
reading of 35168. Although the unit is fitted with a twelve bit
converter the user should not rely on more than 10 bit accuracy
unless great care is taken with screening and analogue ground
connections.

Digital Input/Output using the 8 bit user port
Model B of the BBC computer contains an 8 bit user-port which
can be connected to a wide range of devices such as bit-pads
and general interfacing boxes. The user-port can be read from

                               467
or written to in basic and in assembly language, but in either
case the user will need to know how to use the 6522 Versatile
Interface Adaptor integrated circuit. A 6522 data sheet will be
essential and the user will discover that this extremely versatile
chip is also quite difficult to master. What follows is essential
information that you will need to work the chip rather than a
course in using it. Once you have learned to use it you will
realise that at least twenty pages would be needed to give a
decent introduction to it!
The 6522 lives in the memory map between locations &FE60
and &FE6F. The A side is used for the parallel printer port and
the B side is used for the user-port. The timers and shift register
are also available for the user. When writing small programs
the user can address the device directly either in basic or in
assembly language. However programs that address the device
directly will not work on the far side of the Tube®. Machine
code calls are provided to address the device whichever side of
the Tube the program is on. Firstly, though, here are some
programs in basic and Assembly Language to read and write
to the port.
     10   REM Read data in
     20   REM Set Data Direction Register B
     30   REM for all inputs
     40   ?&FE62=0
     50   REM read a value in and PRINT it
     60   X=?&FE60
     70   PRINT X
     80   GOTO 60
The next program sets up the 6522 to output to the user-port
and then transfers the bottom 8 bits of X to the port. Again the
initialisation need only take place once.
     10 REM ALL outputs
     20 ?&FE62=&FF
     30 REM now put X out
     40 ?&FE60=X
And here are those two programs in assembly language. First
to read data into the accumulator.
   100 LDA #0
   110 STA &FE62
   120 LDA &FE60
                               468
And secondly to write data out to the user port. This time the
program is presented as two subroutines. The first, called
INIT, sets up the 6522 and the second subroutine, WRITE,
actually puts the data out from the accumulator onto the
user-port.
   200   .INIT LDA #&FF
   210   STA &FE62
   220   RTS
   230   .WRITE STA &FE60
   240   RTS
As has been made clear above these programs will not work
from the second processor. The 6522 is one of the memory
mapped input/output devices in the area of memory referred
to as sheila. sheila controls the section of memory map in the
range &FE00 to &FEFF, and the VIA (Versatile Interface
Adaptor) uses addresses between &FE60 and &FE6F which are
therefore sheila+&60 to sheila+&6F. Two osbyte calls (see
page 436) are provided to read and write to sheila. Here are
the same two routines shown above but written so that they
will work over the Tube®.
  100 LDA       #&97      \ OSBYTE to write to
SHEILA
  110 LDX       #&62      \ Offset to Data
direction       reg.
  120 LDY       #0        \ Value to be written
  130 JSR       &FFF4     \ Call OSBYTE
  140 LDA       #&96      \ OSBYTE to read from
SHEILA
  150 LDX       #&60 \ Offset to data reg.
  160 JSR       &FFF4 \ Call OSBYTE to get
value
And next the routine to INIT and WRITE to the user port.
  200 .INIT LDA #&97 \ OSBYTE to write
to SHEILA
  210 LDX #&62 \ Offset to Data
direction reg.
  220 LDY #&FF \ All outputs
  230 JSR &FFF4 \ Call OSBYTE
  240 RTS
  250 .WRITE TAY \ Move value to Y

                              469
   260    LDA #&97 \ Write-to-SHEILA code
   270    LDX #&60 \ Offset to data reg.
   280    JSR &FFF4 \ OSBYTE call
   290    RTS
In practice the user will often wish to use the handshake lines
with data transfers. For information on this topic you are
referred to other books. Space simply does not permit an
adequate explanation here.

                              470
