# 45. Expanding the system

45 Expanding the
   system

Above all the BBC computer is an expandable system. The
Model A can be expanded to the Model B at any time. A floppy
disc interface and one or more floppy disc drives can be added
later. A floppy disc unit will enable you to load and save
programs in a matter of a second or two. If you would like to
keep a mailing list, or any large data-base (like lists of products
and suppliers) then you will find floppy discs invaluable since
they work so much faster than cassette tapes.
For many applications you will want to add a printer. There
are many types and the Model B can work with all except very
old, slow printers such as the 10 characters per second
Teletypes®.
Choosing a printer can be a difficult decision. A booklet from
the Council for Educational Technology, 3 Devonshire Street,
London, W1N 2BA called “USPEC 32B” provides much
impartial guidance. A Daisy Wheel printer will produce high
quality print at a relatively high price. On the other hand, a
dot-matrix or ink-jet printer is a great deal cheaper and quite
adequate for many jobs. The BBC computer can connect to
RS232 serial printers or Centronics® type parallel printers.
The high quality colour monitor will enable you to see the
finest detail produced by the computer’s high resolution colour
circuits.
The Teletext add-on unit enables the BBC computer to look at
the BBC and ITV ceefax, and oracle pages in the normal way.
In addition, with this unit you can receive and store, on cassette
or disc, computer programs that are transmitted over the air
free of charge (so called Telesoftware).

                               471
The Prestel add-on unit connects the BBC computer to a British
Telecom telephone line. Once connected, you can use all the
facilities of Prestel and, again, load computer programs
supplied via Prestel. The transmission of computer programs
in this way is known as Telesoftware. The Prestel unit contains
an approved modem with which you can communicate with
large computer systems world wide as well as with anyone else
who has a BBC computer and Prestel unit. In this way you can
send programs, or sales results or whatever, to anyone else in
the world, at very low cost.
The 8 bit user input/output port on the Model B can be
connected to a wide range of external devices. These include:
bit-pads which enable you to trace or sketch pictures on to the
screen. These can be used when entering engineering drawings
into the system. Robot arms for computer controlled
movement, video disc units enable one of a million pictures to
be rapidly retrieved, and fast analogue interfaces enable the
computer to record fleeting events.
There is space inside the computer to add the voice synthesis
unit. This gives the computer a vocabulary of over 100 words
and further words can be built up or loaded in from cassettes
or disc or ROM-pack. It is very easy to use this unit.
The ROM-pack interface can be added to enable the computer
to use programs held in convenient cartridges. This makes it
very easy to play games and to get a particular applications
program working.
The Econet option will allow you to connect over a hundred
BBC computers together. A normal Econet system consists of
several Model A or Model B systems with Econet interfaces
connected to a printer via a printer-server computer and to a
floppy disc via a file-server computer. The only additional costs
are for cable, plugs and sockets and for the file-server software.
This is an extremely cost-effective way of providing printer and
floppy disc facilities for a group of users. Each user on the
Econet can communicate with other users (unless barred by a
supervisor), and there are many other facilities. For example,
one user can request a copy of another user’s screen.

                               472
The computer can be interfaced to larger and faster networks
such as the Cambridge Ring, thus opening up possibilities for
ultra fast local networks and true distributed processing.
The 1MHz bus connector is provided to enable users and other
manufacturers to connect additional specialist hardware to the
BBC computer. For example, a range of Eurocards and a
racking system are available. The Eurocards include laboratory
interfaces, additional parallel and serial interfaces, eprom
programmers and fast analogue to digital converters. The
Prestel and Teletext units also connect to this “bus”.
The Tube® is a connector and software interface which permits
very high speed communication between the BBC computer
and a second processor. The “second processor” is another
computer system in its own right, but one that uses the BBC
computer for all the time-consuming input/output operations.
The first “second processor” is a fast 6502 with 64K ram. This
should be able to run any program that a Model A/B can run
but with increased speed and with more space available to the
user. Of course only programs that adhere to the Tube®’s
software discipline will run correctly.
Another second processor option is a Z80 with 64K of ram. The
software with this unit allows CP/M® programs to be run with
more memory than a normal CP/M environment. In addition,
the main user program is left free to do calculations, leaving
the BBC computer to deal with graphics, printers, clock, floppy
disc, etc.
A future second processor will be a 16 bit machine with 32 bit
internal architecture. This processor, the National
semiconductors 16032, can be used with up to 16 Megabytes of
ram.
As you will be aware, there is very considerable room for
expansion in the future – an essential feature in view of the
rapid changes in technology.

                               473
