# 46. Error messages

46 Error messages

If the computer is unable to proceed for some reason then it
will report that fact to you by printing an error message on the
screen. The printing of the message can be suppressed by the
statement, for example
ON ERROR GOTO 9000
provided that some special routines had been written in line
9000. As well as the error message the computer sets two
variables each time an error occurs.
ERR gives the “Error number”
ERL gives the number of the line in the program where the
error occurred.
The Error Messages are listed below in alphabetical order
together with their error numbers

Accuracy lost            23
If you try to calculate trigonometric functions with very large
angles you are liable to lose a great deal of accuracy in reducing
the angle to the range of plus or minus PI radians. In this case
the computer will report Accuracy lost. e.g.
PRINT SIN(10000000)

Arguments              31
This error indicates that there are too many or too few
arguments for a given function or procedure.

Array                  14
This indicates that the computer thinks that an array is to be
accessed but does not know the array in question.

                               474
Bad call               30
This indicates that the use of PROC or FN to call a defined
procedure or function is incorrect.

Bad DIM               10
Arrays must be dimensioned with a positive number of
elements. An error will be produced for example by
DIM A(-3)

Bad HEX             28
Hex numbers can only include 0 to 9 and A to F. An attempt to
form a hex number with other letters will result in this error.
e.g.
PRINT &y

Bad MODE                25
This indicates an attempt to change mode inside a procedure or
function, or to select a mode for which there is insufficient
memory.

Bad program
There are a number of occasions on which the computer checks
to see where the program that it contains starts and ends in
memory. The untrappable error Bad program indicates that
the computer could not follow a program through successfully
to an end mark in memory. This is caused by a read error or by
only loading part of a program or by overwriting part of the
program in some way. Unless you are prepared to check the
contents of memory a byte at a time there is little that can be
done to recover a bad program.

Block?                 218
This is an error generated by the cassette filing system. It
indicates that an unexpected block number was encountered.
Rewind the tape a short way and play it again.

Byte                   2
An attempt was made, during an assembly language section, to
load a register with a number requiring more than one byte e.g.
LDA #345

                              475
Can’t match FOR      33
There is no FOR statement corresponding to the NEXT
statement.

Channel                222
This error is generated by the cassette filing system if an
attempt is made to use a channel that was not opened.

Data?                  216
This is an error generated by the cassette filing system and it
means that the computer has found a Cyclic Redundancy
Check (CRC) error. The CRC is stored on the tape along with
other internal information – see page 399 for more information.
Rewind the tape a short way and play it again.

DIM space             11
An attempt was made to dimension an array for which there
was insufficient room.

Division by zero     18
Division by zero cannot be done! e.g.
PRINT 34/0
This error can also be caused by a division within a procedure
or function using a LOCAL variable which has not been set to
a new value. When a variable is declared as LOCAL it is set to
zero.

$ range                 8
The user may put strings into any place in memory except zero
page, that is locations less than 100 hex. Thus this is illegal:
$40="hello"

EOF                    223
This error is generated by the cassette filing system if the end of
the file is reached.

Escape             17
The ESCAPE key has been pressed.

                               476
Exp range              24
The function EXP cannot deal with powers greater than 88.
Thus the following is illegal.
X=EXP(90)

Failed at 0
When renumbering a program the computer attempts to look
after all references made by GOTO and GOSUB statements.
Thus the program
   133 GOTO 170
   170 END
would become
     10 GOTO 20
     20 END
when renumbered. However, the computer would not be able
to deal with
   133 GOTO 140
   200 END
If the user attempts to renumber this program he will get the
error message
Failed at 10
and the renumbered program will be
     10 GOTO 140
     20 END

File?                 219
This error generated by the cassette filing system indicates that
an unexpected file name was encountered by the computer.

FOR variable           34
The variable in a FOR...NEXT loop must be a numeric
variable. Thus the following is illegal
FOR 5=3 TO 10

                               477
Header?                217
This is an error generated by the cassette filing system and it
indicates that a header Cyclic Redundancy Check error has
occurred – see page 399 for further information. Rewind the
tape a short way and play it again.

Index                  3
This indicates an error in specifying an index mode when using
the assembler. e.g. LDA Z,Z.

Key in use            250
An attempt has been made to define a function key while
another function key is being expanded. e.g.
*KEY 0 *KEY 1 RUN ¦M ¦M

LINE space
The computer has no room left to insert the line in the
program.

Log range             22
An attempt was made to calculate the LOG of a negative
number or of zero. e.g. PRINT LOG(-10)

Missing ,              5
This error indicates that the computer expected to find a
comma in the line, and didn’t do so. e.g. D$=MID$(A$)

Missing "           9
The computer expected a double quote. e.g. LOAD "FRED

Missing )           27
The computer expected a closing bracket. e.g. TAB(10,10

Missing #           45
The computer expected a hash. e.g. A=BGET

Mistake                4
This indicates that the computer could not make any sense of
the input line.

-ve root           21
An attempt was made to calculate the square root of a negative
number. e.g. SQR(-10). May also occur with ASN and ACS.
                               478
No GOSUB            38
A RETURN statement was found when no GOSUB statement
had been encountered.

No FN                  7
This indicates that the computer detected the end of a function
but had not called a function definition. e.g.
=FNsue

No FOR             32
A NEXT statement was found when no FOR statement had
been encountered.

No PROC                13
This indicates that the word ENDPROC was found without
there being a corresponding DEF PROC statement.

No REPEAT             43
The interpreter found an UNTIL statement when no REPEAT
statement had been encountered.

No room              0
This untrappable error indicates that while the computer was
running a program it used up all available memory.

No such FN/PROC 29
If the interpreter meets a name beginning with FN (e.g.
FNfred) or PROC (e.g. PROCsteve) it expects to be able to
find a corresponding function or procedure definition
somewhere. This error indicates that no matching definition
was found.

No such line          41
The computer was told to GOTO or GOSUB a line number
which does not exist.

No such variable      26
All variables must be assigned to, or made LOCAL, before they
can be accessed in PRINT statements or before their values
can be assigned to other variables. The initial assignment can
simply be for example, X=0.

                              479
No TO                  36
A FOR...NEXT loop has been set up with the TO part
missing. A correctly formed line is shown below
FOR X=10 TO 55

Not LOCAL             12
This indicates the appearance of LOCAL outside a procedure
or function.

ON range              40
The control variable was either less than 1 or greater than the
number of entries in the ON list. For example if X=3 then this
will fail.
ON X GOTO 100,200
since there are only two destinations.

ON syntax        39
The ON...GOTO statement was misformed, for example this
is illegal
ON X PRINT
The word ON must be followed by a numeric variable which
must in turn be followed by the word GOTO or GOSUB.

Out of DATA             42
An attempt was made to read more items of DATA than there
were in the DATA list. The word RESTORE can be used to
reset the data pointer to the start of the DATA if required.

Out of range           1
An attempt was made to branch out of range of the branch
instruction in the assembler.

Silly
This message will be issued if you attempt to renumber a
program or enter AUTO mode with a step size of 0 or more
than 255. e.g.
AUTO 100,0

                               480
Syntax                 220
This error is generated by the cassette filing system. It indicates
that a syntax error, such as an illegal *OPT statement has
occurred.

String too long    19
The maximum length of a string is 255 characters.

Subscript              15
This implies that an attempt was made to access an element of
an array less than zero or greater than the size of the array. For
example these two lines together will produce this error.
   100 DIM A(10)
   120 A(15)=3

Syntax error      16
A command was terminated wrongly for example
LIST PRINT

Too big              20
A number was entered or calculated which was too large for
the computer to handle.

Too many FORs        35
An attempt was made to “nest” too many FOR...NEXT
loops. The maximum nesting allowed is 10. This can sometimes
be caused by returning to a FOR statement without executing a
NEXT statement. e.g.
     10 FOR X=1 TO 6
     20 GOTO 10

Too many GOSUBs 37
An attempt was made to “nest” too many
GOSUB...RETURN loops. The maximum nesting allowed is
26. This can sometimes be caused by returning to a GOSUB
statement without executing a RETURN statement. e.g.
     10 PRINT "WRONG"
     20 GOSUB 10

                               481
Too many REPEATs 44
An attempt was made to “nest” too many
REPEAT...UNTIL loops. The maximum nesting allowed is
20. This can sometimes be caused by returning to a REPEAT
statement without executing an UNTIL statement. e.g.
    10 REPEAT
    20 GOTO 10
Type mismatch          6
This error indicates that a number was expected and a string
was offered or vice-versa. e.g.
    10 A$=X
Num Error message                  Num   Error message
 1 Out of range                    30    Bad call
 2 Byte                            31    Arguments
 3 Index                           32    No FOR
 4 Mistake                         33    Can’t match
 5 Missing ,                             FOR
 6 Type mismatch                   34    FOR variable
 7 No FN                           35    Too many FORs
 8 $ range                         36    No TO
 9 Missing "                       37    Too many GOSUBs
10 Bad DIM                         38    No GOSUB
11 DIM space                       39    ON syntax
12 Not LOCAL                       40    ON range
13 No PROC                         41    No such line
14 Array                           42    Out of DATA
15 Subscript                       43    No REPEAT
16 Syntax error                    44    Too many
17 Escape                                REPEATs
18 Division by zero                 45   Missing #
19 String too long                 216   Data?
20 Too big                         217   Header?
21 -ve root                        218   Block?
22 Log range                       219   File?
23 Accuracy lost                   220   Syntax
24 Exp range                       222   Channel
25 Bad MODE                        223   EOF
26 No such variable                250   Key in use
27 Missing )                       251   Bad key
28 Bad HEX                         253   Bad string
29 No such FN/PROC                 254   Bad command
                             482
